LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for
Natural-language Proofs
Chenjun Guo
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
chenjun_guo@berkeley.edu
Manooshree Patel
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
manooshreepatel@berkeley.edu
Arnav Mehta
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
arnavmehta@berkeley.edu
Krishiv Kothari
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
krishivkothari@berkeley.edu
Thomas Lu∗
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
thomaslu@berkeley.edu
Niels Voss∗
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
niels_voss@berkeley.edu
Rayna Bhattacharyya∗
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
rayna_b@berkeley.edu
Peter Donovan∗
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
peterdonovan@berkeley.edu
Bjoern Hartmann
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
bjoern@eecs.berkeley.edu
Gireeja Ranade
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
ranade@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
Large language models are increasingly used as collaborators on
deductive-reasoning tasks, but their outputs can hallucinate or pull
users away from intended reasoning. Formal proof assistants pro-
vide machine-checked verification, but have a steep learning curve
and require more granular reasoning than human written proofs.
We explore an interface that combines these strengths, allowing
users to write and revise free-form natural-language proofs while
a verified backend checks their reasoning and returns feedback
at the user’s granularity. We study this interface in the context
of undergraduate mathematics education by developing LeanSide,
a formally verified co-reasoning system, which auto-formalizes
student reasoning into Lean and informalizes verifier output into
understandable feedback. We conducted user studies through class-
room deployment and analyzed which system properties helped
students make progress and which caused them to get stuck. We
use these findings to derive design implications for using a formally
verified backend in human-AI co-reasoning systems.
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →Natural language interfaces;
Interactive systems and tools.
Keywords
Human-AI collaborative reasoning, Large Language Models, Natural-
language theorem proving, Lean, Theorem proving, math education
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are being explored as collaborators
on deductive-reasoning tasks, where conclusions necessarily follow
from given premises or rules [91]. Such tasks arise across domains,
including mathematics [15, 30, 47, 52, 72, 99, 109], programming [30,
49], legal judgment [24, 39, 77], and clinical decision support [43,
68, 85, 86].
However, LLM-generated reasoning can contain hallucinations [35,
108]. One solution is to express reasoning in a machine-checkable
formal language such as Lean [18], Isabelle [74], and Rocq [6],
whose kernels mechanically checks formalized proofs and pro-
vides hallucination-free feedback. Such formal representations are
widely used in high-assurance domains, including hardware verifi-
cation [103], and increasingly in the formalization of mathematical
research [75, 83]. A successfully checked formal artifact provides
strong confidence in logical validity.
But these languages have a steep learning curve [81, 92] and
demand far more granular and rigorous reasoning than people con-
ventionally write [25, 73, 90]. A growing body of work has started
to use auto-formalization to automatically formalize informal rea-
soning into machine-checkable code, originating from and richest
in mathematics [4, 55, 58, 73, 106, 111], and extending to other rule-
based domains, such as legal and tax judgment [39, 77] and clinical
support [85].
Despite rapid progress in auto-formalization, prior systems have
primarily aimed to generate verified formal code for increasingly
advanced problems, rather than to faithfully follow a user’s rea-
soning trace. They have also paid less attention to interactive
settings where user input may be free-form, ambiguous, incom-
plete, or still in progress. Traditionally, formalization is a post-hoc
arXiv:2610.00760v1  [cs.HC]  30 Sep 2026


Guo et al.
check: a mathematician formalizes a finished proof into machine-
checkable code after the argument is complete [58, 106]. Existing
auto-formalization systems largely inherit this framing, typically
only support well-formed, textbook-style proofs as input [4, 55, 58].
As a result, they are not well suited to serving as interactive collab-
orators for proofs that are still being developed.
In human communication, partners continually build mutual
understanding [13, 14], thus a formally verified collaborative agent
must support an analogous grounding loop: users need to know
both whether the system has “understood” their reasoning and
what verification result it produced. We aim to build an informal-
reasoning collaborative agent that makes the power of formal
verification accessible to broader audiences who are trained
to reason in their own domains but have no knowledge of the
formal language. Users read and write as they would when com-
municating with another person, while a verified backend interprets
and checks their reasoning: auto-formalization maps informal input
to a formal representation, and informalization maps verifier output
back into everyday reasoning (Figure 1). This interaction allows
users to gain confidence in the validity of the system’s feedback.
We study student interactions with such a formally verified co-
reasoning system (FVCR) for undergraduate mathematics, a timely
setting as students increasingly use LLM-based tools for homework
feedback [11, 54, 98]. LLMs can produce convincing but at times
incorrect answers [35, 40, 96, 108] or distract students from their
original reasoning paths [54].
We call this tool LeanSide. LeanSide affords students to ex-
press their reasoning in familiar language and at their desired
granularity (i.e., the level of detail of a step), validate their
reasoning through formally verified feedback, and iterate
on mistakes in their proofs. Our goal is not to provide fully
“tutor-like” feedback: we do not optimize the system to behave like
a human tutor or to be maximally helpful pedagogically. Instead, we
investigate the possible role of formal verification in an interaction
loop where students work using familiar informal language, asking
how much Lean’s verification power can help students. We also
recognize that recent high-profile AI mathematics results do not
make formal verification obsolete; they often pair generative search
with formalization [23, 71], and our work asks how this pairing can
be brought into interactive settings for students and other users.
The main goals and affordances are shown in Fig. 2. We con-
tribute: (1) LeanSide, a system that uses formal language as a verifi-
cation backbone while supporting the design goals of low threshold,
high ceiling, wide walls, and transparency for non-expert interac-
tion. We describe the technical challenges of meeting these goals
and our implementation solutions. (2) A user study with 23 partic-
ipants, conducted alongside a classroom deployment, examining
whether and how students use system feedback to iterate on their
proofs. (3) Empirical findings on which system features helped stu-
dents make progress and which barriers limited progress, together
with design implications for how AI co-reasoning systems can use
formal verification to move beyond current limitations.
er
atural
anuae
o-reaoninaent
Auto-formalizer
ean
Informalizer
atural
anuae
Figure 1: User workflow in a co-reasoning system: users ex-
press input and receive output in natural or informal lan-
guage while the system auto-formalizes input into Lean, ver-
ifies it, and informalizes the result.
2
Related Work
In this section, we first discuss relevant HCI literature on co-reasoning
systems. We then turn to recent advances and limitations in auto-
formalization, which lays the background and motivation of our
works but have largely been discussed outside HCI in the mathe-
matics, AI and education communities.
2.1
Challenges of human-AI collaboration in
reasoning tasks
The recent popularity of LLMs has renewed the aspiration of using
natural language to collaborate with machines on reasoning tasks.
LLM based system has long being discussed about the problems of
hallucinations and user agency preservation.
In LLM-assisted reasoning, fluent explanations can make in-
correct conclusions particularly difficult to reject [42], users may
become more confident after accepting incorrect advice [8], and
erroneous LLM-generated information can directly lead to incorrect
decisions [88]. In logical reasoning tasks, programmers [67] and
domain scientists [70] could both fail to detect errors in generated
code. Prior interfaces address this problem by exposing inconsis-
tencies [12], highlighting suspected hallucinations [45], or making
generated behavior executable and inspectable [20]. In our sys-
tem, we take another route to reducing hallucinations by using a
formally verified backend.
Prior work has also long raised concerns about preserving user
agency in such collaboration. Although current interfaces appear
to support fully free-form natural-language input, users, especially
novices, can struggle to articulate their thoughts into effective in-
formal reasoning input for the system [38, 67, 112]. In human-AI
collaboration for programming, users also face difficulty inspecting
whether generated code interpreted and implements their intended
reasoning [114] and debugging prompts systematically [38, 112,
114]. Prior work links these challenges to failures of shared under-
standing: plausible but misaligned LLM outputs can pull users away
from their original reasoning and require costly monitoring and
repair [17, 62, 89]. In programming, long LLM generated sugges-
tions can disrupt programmers’ flow [5], while inspecting, verify-
ing, and editing them imposes additional interaction costs [62]. In
decision-making, automated suggestions can reduce users’ initia-
tive [46], and LLM recommendations can leave less room for users’
independent reasoning [78]. Across broader domains, LLM-based
collaboration can also weaken users’ sense of ownership [19] or
redirect their thinking toward the model’s suggestions [34].


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
Make Lean 
accessible through 
informal proof 
language
Overall Goal
Validate and 
improve proof 
correctness through 
system feedback
ser study 
evaluation goal 
How do students 
  make progress on 
    their proof with the
       system feedbacks
           and when do they get 
               stuck?
Transparency for 
system 
interpretation
Express reasoning 
in familiar language 
and granularity
System affordance
Low threshold and 
high ceiling for 
feedback
Design goals
Expressiveness via 
wide wall
System 
     performance 
          evaluation
faithfulness and 
accuracy
Interpret incomplete, 
incorrect, and ambiguous 
informal reasoning
Implementation 
challenges
Preserve the 
student's reasoning 
path faithfully
Judge correctness 
at the course 
granularity.
Responsive
-ness
Figure 2: This figure summarizes the system’s goals, affordances, design goals, and implementation requirements.
Consequently, interfaces have begun to externalize the system’s
interpretation to bring mutual understanding back to the conver-
sation. Liu et al. [53] frame natural-language programming as an
abstraction-matching problem and help users inspect and repair
mismatches between their goals and the system’s interpretation,
closely paralleling our design. SOVITE [48] aims to build mutual
understanding with the users by displaying the system’s inferred
intents through GUI screenshots. These works motivate our focus
on making the system’s interpretation inspectable.
2.2
Lean and auto-formalization
Interactive theorem provers such as Lean [18], Isabelle [74], and
Rocq [6] provide machine-checked environments for formalizing
mathematics. However, they remain difficult for non-experts: they
require a steep learning curve and a level of granularity far below
ordinary mathematical writing [82], creating an accessibility gap
between formal verification and how students and mathematicians
normally write proofs.
Auto-formalization aims to narrow this gap by translating natural-
language mathematics into formal language. Recent work has fo-
cused mainly on statement auto-formalization, which translates
informal theorems into Lean propositions [4, 21, 36, 50, 55–58,
76, 102, 105, 106, 111], and automated theorem proving, which
starts from a formal proposition and generates compiled formal
proofs [51, 107, 110].
A smaller body of work explores whole-proof auto-formalization [10,
32, 37, 63, 73, 90, 97], raising the issue of faithfulness: whether
the formal proof preserves the content and organization of the
informal reasoning. Existing work operationalizes faithfulness in
several ways, including semantic similarity between informal and
formal steps [50, 57], bidirectional equivalence between formal can-
didates [55, 76], structural fidelity of intermediate claims and proof
dependencies [10, 73], and robustness to paraphrases or invalid
steps, where systems must avoid silently changing or repairing the
user’s meaning [16, 61]. At the proof level, ProofFlow represents
proof structure as a dependency graph [10].
However, most auto-formalization benchmarks still assume pol-
ished, textbook-style, one-shot inputs. ProofNet pairs textbook
problems with a single natural-language proof and Lean state-
ment [4]; miniF2F and Lean Workbook focus on theorem or prob-
lem statements rather than human proof revision [111, 113]; and
several widely used datasets are constructed from formal corpora
rather than situated human proof writing, such as MMA and Her-
ald [21, 36], TheoremLlama’s OBT data [97], and MUSTARD [32].
Student proofs in learning contexts are often more fragmented,
nonlinear, implicit, and loosely structured than these benchmarks
assume [26, 104]. Moreover, when students work with a human
tutor or tutoring system, they often expect iteration, making their
proofs more likely to be incomplete, incorrect, or expressed only
as high-level ideas [7, 94]. We therefore study auto-formalization
not as one-shot translation of finished proofs, but as a co-reasoning
process through which students introduce, revise, repair, and clarify
mathematical ideas while the formal state evolves with the interac-
tion.
2.3
Making formal verification accessible
Prior work has explored multiply ways to make formal verifica-
tion more accessible to both expert and non-experts. In mathe-
matics education, several studies have tried to make formal lan-
guages accessible by teaching them directly in mathematics class-
rooms [27, 29, 31, 33, 93]. Students benefit from faster feedback
loops, but these tools still pose pedagogical challenges: Lean error
messages can be insufficient for students [27], and proof-assistant
feedback may signal that a problem exists without explaining
why [2]. Hazel Prover addresses this challenge through design
criteria for educational proof assistants, including pedagogical feed-
back, error tolerance, scaffolding, easy interaction, and classroom
deployability [41]. These criteria offer an educational perspective
complementary to our focus.
Other systems lower the barrier through visualization and con-
trolled natural language. These include visualizing unsolved Lean
goals [65], de-automating automatically generated proofs [80], sup-
porting controlled-natural-language proofs [60, 101], and using
domain-specific visualizations to teach formal methods [66]. These
tools make formal systems easier to inspect and use, but still only
allowed a subset of utterances.
A related line of work studies human-AI collaboration for proof
formalization. Lea supports mathematician-in-the-loop Lean de-
velopment [95], while LLMStep [100] and Lean Copilot [87] assist
formalization with tactic suggestion, proof search, and premise


Guo et al.
selection. These systems primarily support experts producing for-
mal proofs, rather than non-experts seeking verified feedback on
natural-language reasoning.
Formal verification has also been applied beyond mathematics,
including tax, legal [39, 77], and medical reasoning [28, 85]. These
works demonstrate the potential of utilizing machine-checkable rea-
soning in high-stakes domains, but primarily focus on the technical
realization rather than learning how people engage with formally
verified feedback through informal-language interfaces.
Our work is related to all of these efforts, but moves beyond
expert-facing tools by using a natural-language interface and ex-
amining how people interact with such systems in practice.
3
System design
This system targets undergraduate students with no knowledge of
Lean, and it is designed for deployment in undergraduate math-
ematics courses. To afford expressing reasoning through natural
language, validating and iterating on proofs, we adopt three corre-
sponding design goals: (1) expressiveness via wide walls [79], (2)
low-threshold and high-ceiling feedback [64], and (3) transparency
of system representation.
A user’s workflow is as follows: (1) the user enters free-form
reasoning by uploading handwriting, or typing directly; (2) The
system auto-formalizes the input into verified Lean code (3) the
resulting code and compiler output are informalized into natural-
language feedback; and (4) the user revises their proof based on
the feedback. Users can iterate on their proof without reading or
writing Lean, but can open a Lean code panel to see how their steps
map to Lean if interested.
3.1
Expressiveness via wide walls
Creative-support tools should have “wide walls,” supporting vari-
ous forms of exploration beyond predefined actions [79]. We treat
proof-solving as a creative activity—students use different strate-
gies, write at different granularity, and rely on various informal or
ambiguous representations. Our system therefore supports reason-
ing in whichever form users find most natural. Users can upload
a photo of handwritten work
F1 (see Fig. 3 for this and all fea-
ture refs) or type directly in LATEX on central panel. These methods
covers two primary ways our target users write proofs. Unlike
many auto-formalization settings, where natural-language proofs
are textbook-like, complete, and close to formal structure, input
modes in our system support proofs as they are produced, not only
after they are polished, even when they are ambiguous, exploratory,
incorrect, or incomplete.
3.2
Low Threshold and High Ceiling
Effective tools should be easy for novices to start with while sup-
porting advanced work [64]. Our system aims to make Lean’s veri-
fication power accessible without requiring Lean expertise.
First, the interface helps users connect their written reasoning to
the system’s formalization: clicking a user-written proof-step cell
in the central panel displays the corresponding informalized Lean
interpretation in the right panel
F2 . A natural-language step may
map to multiple informalization cells when it contains multiple
smallest progression units (further explained in Section 4.1.1), as
in
F2.1 where step 2 maps to two assertions. Each smallest pro-
gression unit is classified as either a declaration or an assertion.
Declarations, such as assumption introductions
F2.2 , are always
marked green
because users may introduce assumptions freely.
Assertions are marked green
when verified, or yellow
with
an error message when verification fails
F2.3 . The informaliza-
tion visualization keeps feedback at the user’s granularity: specific
enough to localize errors, but not so fine-grained that low-level
formal details create information overload.
Second, the interface makes errors understandable without re-
quiring users to inspect Lean code. Step-wise errors are shown di-
rectly inside the informalization cell for the incorrect claim
F2.3 ;
when all written steps are correct but the proof remains incomplete,
the system shows a continuation feedback at the end of the user’s
proof
F4 .
Advanced users who know Lean or want to learn it can click
“See Lean code” to view the highlighted Lean block correspond to
each step
F3 .
Here is an overview of five possible feedback types. Appendix B
shows examples for each type of feedback.
• Step-level error messages appear when some steps are
faulty; each unverified step shows an informalized proposi-
tion and an error message.
• Continuation error messages appear when all steps are
verified but the proof remains incomplete, under the condi-
tions described in Section 4.1.3.
• Continuation hints also appear when all steps are verified
but the proof remains incomplete, under the conditions
described in Section 4.1.3.
• Large-jump warnings provide optional guidance on veri-
fied steps that could be further justified.
• Suggestions provide optional guidance for fully verified,
correct, and complete proofs, helping make the proof more
rigorous.
3.3
Transparency
Free-form input alone is insufficient: the system must make its
interpretation transparent. Users can trust verification feedback
only after confirming that the system formalized the reasoning they
intended. We do this at two levels. First, users are able to assess
the faithfulness of auto-formalization through Feature
F2 , which
maps each user-written proof step to its informalized Lean inter-
pretation. Second, to support free-form input, the system surfaces
how it resolves underspecified language: ambiguous references are
highlighted with predicted meanings
F5 , and each sentence is
labeled with its predicted action type, such as an assertion or decla-
ration
F2.2 . We describe the pre-processing module behind these
predictions in Section 4.1.1.
4
Implementation
To support expressiveness, validation, and proof iteration, the sys-
tem must meet four implementation challenges:
• Interpret free-form reasoning. The system must be able
to interpret student reasoning even when it is incorrect,
ambiguous, or incomplete.


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
Feature 1: Input support
F1.1: Image to Latex
Feature 5: 
Ambiguity Resolution
Feature 4: Next step hint
Appear when every step is correct but the proof 
is incomplete
F2.2: example of declaration
F2.1: example of correct assertion
LeanSide Compiler
F2.3: example of wrong assertion
Feature 2: Informalization visualization
Feature 3: Lean 
code panel
Click “See Lean Code >” 
to open this panel
Figure 3: The User Interface. Students use the system by uploading handwritten proofs, or typing in. In this snapshot, a student
has already uploaded an image of their proof and completed the verification process. The resulting feedback is displayed.
• Preserve the student’s reasoning path faithfully. The
system must faithfully auto-formalize and informalize stu-
dent reasoning. This differs from common auto-formalization
settings, where the primary goal is to produce compiled
Lean code for a target theorem. In our system, silently re-
pairing a flawed argument or altering the proof path would
undermine the student’s ability to see whether their own
reasoning was understood and verified.
• Judge accurately at the course granularity. The system
must accurately determine whether each proof step is valid.
In an educational setting, correctness also depends on gran-
ularity: a proof may be formally valid but pedagogically
unacceptable if it skips an instructor-defined intermediate
step. The system therefore needs to identify both incorrect
steps and steps whose reasoning gap is too large for the
course context.
• Responsiveness. The system must return feedback quickly
enough to support an interactive co-reasoning loop. Com-
mercial auto-formalization systems that handle research-
level mathematics can be slow [44], while proof tutoring
requires students to revise, resubmit, and compare feed-
back repeatedly. The system therefore balances verification
quality with latency suitable for real-time interaction.
4.1
System pipeline
The system consists of two main components: an auto-formalizer,
which translates students’ proof attempts into Lean and attempts to
compile them, and an informalizer, which translates the generated
Lean code and compiler feedback back into natural language for
students. The auto-formalizer includes three modules: a natural-
language pre-processor, a proof scaffolder, and a prover. All the
modules are LLM-based. Figure 4 explains the detailed architecture
of the system.
4.1.1
Natural-language pre-processor. The natural-language pre-
processor is the first module in the auto-formalizer. It takes students’
original natural-language input, either typed directly into the sys-
tem or entered through Optical Character Recognition (OCR). This
module builds on the pre-processing system of Guo et al. [26]. It has
two goals: (1) to resolve ambiguity in the natural-language proof
so that the proof can be more reliably translated into Lean, and (2)
to parse the proof into the smallest progression units. We define
a smallest progression unit as a minimal, self-contained statement,
at the level of content expressed by the student, that includes one
antecedent, one consequent, and evidence(s).
Our system resolves three common ambiguities in student proofs
through a three-stage chain adapted from Guo et al. [26]:
• Referential ambiguity. The system first identifies referen-
tially ambiguous terms whose intended referents are un-
clear and predicts those referents. At this stage, the proof
remains a single piece of text and is not yet parsed into
steps.
• Action-type ambiguity. The system then parses the proof
according to action type, where the ambiguity is whether
a step functions as an assertion or a declaration. Asser-
tions progress the proof by deriving new information from
known results, hypotheses, or unsolved goals, while declara-
tions set up necessary context without directly progressing
the proof [26, 84]. Based on student proofs in practice, we
further divide declarations into five subtypes: introducing
new variables, stating the proof goal, declaring a proof
strategy, repeating known facts from the question or ear-
lier proof, and declaring completion by restating the final
conclusion. The proof is segmented whenever the action
type changes.
• Antecedent-consequent-evidence ambiguity. Finally, the sys-
tem parses continuous assertions into the smallest progres-
sion units and predicts the antecedent, consequent, and
evidence for each unit. This step addresses ambiguities
where students write multiple assertions continuously and
leave some of these components implicit.
To support transparency, the interface displays the results of
these ambiguity-resolution steps as described in Section 3.3.
4.1.2
Proof Scaffolder. This module takes the pre-processor output
and converts each smallest progression unit into a self-contained


Guo et al.
Mini Lemma 
Library
Lemma 
Prover
Free-form NL proof
Let M = ||x||_∞
Disambiguated NL proof
Step 1: Declaration
Let M = ||x||_∞
Lean statements with sorry
set M := s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|) 
with hM
Lemma 
Prover
M = |x_j| for some index j
lemma step_2 (M : ℝ) (hM : M = 
s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|)): ∃ j ∈ 
s, M = |x j| := by sorry
Step 2: Assertion
M = |x_j| for some index j
Let S = ||x||_1
Step 3: Decleration
Let S = ||x||_1
|x_j| ≤ S
set S := ∑ i ∈ s, |x i|
lemma step_4 (M : ℝ) (hM : M = 
s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|)) (S : ℝ) 
(hS : S = ∑ i ∈ s, |x i|) :|x j| ≤ 
S := by sorry
Step 4: Assertion
|x_j| ≤ S
Proof 
assembler
 Pre-processor 
Proof Scaffolder
Proof of Step 2 lemma
lemma step_2 (M : ℝ) (hM : M = 
s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|)): ∃ j ∈ 
s, M = |x j| := by 
    Proof_filled_in
Proof of Step 4 lemma
lemma step_4 (M : ℝ) (hM : M = 
s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|)) (S : ℝ) 
(hS : S = ∑ i ∈ s, |x i|) :|x j| ≤ 
S := by 
    proof_filled_in 
Complete proof
set M := s.sup' hs (fun i => |x i|)
with hx
obtain ⟨j, hj, hjeq⟩ := step_2 M hM
set S := ∑ i ∈ s, |x i| with hS
have h4 : |x j| ≤ S := step_4 M j 
hj S hS
rw [hjeq]
exact h4
Informalized NL proof
Let M = ||x||_∞
Since M = ||x||_∞, there 
exists some j ∈ s such that 
M = |x_j|.
Let S = ||x||_1
If S = Σ_{i ∈ s} |x_i|, 
then for every j ∈ s, |x_j| 
≤ S.
Informalizer
Figure 4: This figure shows the system pipeline. Student input (left) is auto-formalized into Lean through the pre-processor,
proof scaffolder and prover, which includes the lemma prover and proof assembler. The generated Lean code and error messages
are then informalized back into natural language. The mini-lemma library supports the lemma prover.
Lean 4 lemma statement mapped one-to-one to the student’s proof.
It does this through declaration scaffolding and assertion scaffold-
ing. Declaration scaffolding converts informative declarations, such
as introduced variables and stated proof goals, into Lean code,
while ignoring declarations that repeat known facts or restate the
final conclusion. Assertion scaffolding converts each assertion into
a Lean proposition, represented as prop in the lemma template
lemma name (hypotheses): prop := by sorry. Following the
proof order, each later assertion’s (hypotheses) includes all hy-
potheses from the problem and from the aforementioned declara-
tions. The scaffolder does not prove these propositions; it fills the
proof body with sorry, a placeholder that lets Lean provisionally
accept the proposition.
This design separates proposition generation from lemma prov-
ing to better preserve faithfulness to the student’s proof structure.
4.1.3
Prover. The prover receives Lean declarations and assertion
propositions in the order expressed by the student. It consists of
two components: a lemma prover, which attempts to prove each as-
sertion lemma, and a proof assembler, which combines the verified
lemmas to check whether they complete the proof. If any asser-
tion fails in the lemma prover, the proof assembler is not triggered;
instead, the error message is passed to the informalizer for student-
facing feedback. Both provers are LLM-based and use an iterative
loop: when generated code fails to compile, the prover retries using
the code and compiler error message until the proposition compiles
or the maximum number of attempts is reached.
Mini-lemma library. To satisfy the system requirement of re-
sponsiveness, we use faster LLMs as the prover backbone. However,
such models usually have weaker reasoning ability, we complement
them with a curated mini-lemma library. The library contains two
types of lemmas: rubric lemmas, which are mapped to the rubric
for each problem, and side-support lemmas, which capture smaller
pieces of reasoning that students are not expected to write in the
course context but that the prover cannot reliably generate.
We curated the mini-lemma library semi-automatically. Researchers
first used stronger LLM models to generate Lean proofs for rubric
lemmas, then tested the library on full-credit student proofs from
previous exams, and added side-support lemmas when the prover
failed on those proofs. This process helped the library support mul-
tiple student proof strategies. We also developed a fully automated
lemma-generation pipeline to improve generalizability, although
human inspection is still required to label rubric and side lemmas.
The mini-lemmas for Question 13 (Appendix A) were curated us-
ing this fully automated pipeline, with two researchers reviewing
the lemma quality to ensure the same standard as for the other
questions.
4.1.4
Informalizer. The informalizer generates student-facing feed-
back from the lemma propositions and compiler error messages. Its
outputs are shown in the informalization cells ( F2 ) and feedback
panel ( F4 ). For each step, the informalizer translates the Lean
proposition back into natural language using researcher-curated in-
structions design to aligned with the notation and terminology used
in the course. Note that the informalizer takes only the Lean code
and error message as input, but do not see the student’s proofs. We
specifically designed the system this way to use Lean’s verification
ability without relying on the LLM’s pedagogical ability.
For step-level feedback, a successfully verified step is marked
green . If the prover used more than one rubric lemma, the system
informalizes those lemmas and shows a large-jump warning. If the


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
step cannot be verified, the Lean compiler error is informalized into
a step-wise error message.
For whole-proof feedback, the system considers two cases. If the
proof assembler fails to compile the problem statement using the
student’s steps, the proof is marked incomplete and the compiler
error is informalized into a continuation error message. If the proof
assembler succeeds, the system counts the rubric lemmas used in
the assembled proof. When more than two rubric lemmas are used,
the proof is still treated as incomplete and the system shows a
continuation hint. When two or fewer rubric lemmas are used, the
proof is treated as complete, and the system may show a suggestion
based on the supporting and rubric lemmas used.
5
User study procedure
This section describes the study context and procedure.
5.1
Context: classroom deployment
We deployed the system in an advanced undergraduate linear alge-
bra course at a university, where most students were computer sci-
ence majors, with a smaller portion from other engineering majors
or graduate programs. Across 13 weeks, we deployed 14 questions,
releasing one to five questions weekly or biweekly according to
the course curriculum. Before deployment, we conducted three
pilot studies with course teaching assistants or students who had
previously taken the course.
At the start of the semester, research team gave a 10-minute
in-class demonstration of how to use the system. As new questions
were released, we conducted one-on-one user study sessions with
students. Students participated by voluntarily signing up for open
slots. Participants received 1 point of extra credit, out of 100 total
course points, for attending the session; their performance and
whether they completed the proof during the session did not affect
this credit. The system logged all student actions.
5.2
Participants
In total, we conducted 27 user study sessions. Two sessions were
unusable for technical reasons, one for recording failure and one for
a student who was not following the class context and thus was not
able to understand and attempt to answer the question. Therefore,
the analyses presented in this paper are based on the remaining 23
sessions. Participants had a similar distribution of majors (14/23 are
Computer Science), class years (21/23 are undergraduate students),
and grades as the full class (details in Appendix C).
22 participants had used the system at least once before attending
the study session, while the remaining one knew how to use it from
the classroom demonstration. 6 participants reported that they had
heard of Lean, and 2 reported that they had tried Lean through an
introductory game [9], but none of the participants had sufficient
Lean knowledge to write a proof, even one simpler than the course
material, on their own.
5.3
One-on-one User study protocol
Each study session lasted two hours. We first spent 5 minutes es-
tablishing rapport and asking participants about their backgrounds
and experience. Then, during the first 1.5 hours, students wrote
proofs and iterated on them using the system’s feedback. In the
remaining half hour, we conducted a short interview about their
experience with the system.
In the first 1.5 hours, students were prompted to choose ques-
tions to complete during the study. They were told that there was no
time limit for any individual question and that the study included
no reward or penalty based on whether they answered questions
correctly. If a participant finished one question, they were asked
to start another until the allotted time was exhausted. We used
three criteria for selecting questions: (1) the student must not have
previously attempted the question using the system; (2) we encour-
aged students to choose questions for which they were less certain
about the solution, so that we could observe iterative progress; and
(3) when both criteria were satisfied, we preferred more recently
released questions that were closer to the material just taught in
class. No participant completed all questions correctly on the first
attempt without seeing system feedback.
Participants were allowed to consult course materials, their own
notes, and browser search results, but could not use AI tools. When
search engines displayed AI-generated overviews, we allowed par-
ticipants to read them as part of the search results, provided they
had not entered the proof question directly as a query.
Participants were instructed to think aloud while interacting
with the system. However, they were not required to think aloud
while writing proofs, to avoid disrupting their proof construction.
Instead, each time participants finished a proof and before they
submitted it for verification, we asked them to briefly walk through
their reasoning and rate their confidence in the proof’s correctness
on a 1–5 scale. Each time participants received system feedback,
we asked three questions: (1) whether each informalization accu-
rately represented what they meant (faithfulness); (2) whether the
system feedback was accurate; and (3) for error messages, whether
they were understandable, relevant, and useful. Participants were
prompted to comment on any of these topics and were also free to
raise other comments.
In the final half hour, participants were interviewed about their
experience using the system, including how it compared with using
an LLM or attending an in-person office hour. Participants who
had not previously opened the Lean code panel were also invited
to open it once. The researchers briefly explained how to read the
code, and participants were asked whether the code provided any
useful extra information not visible in the platform.
5.4
Analysis and Evaluation
We extracted five types of information from each user study session:
(1) expert-evaluated system performance: whether the system’s
feedback was faithful and accurate according to the definitions
in the implementation section; (2) perceived system performance:
whether the student thought the system had auto-formalized faith-
fully and provided accurate feedback; (3) proof progress: whether
each student modification was effective, incorrect, or unrelated;
(4) students’ open-ended comments after receiving each piece of
feedback; and (5) students’ answers to the predefined interview
questions.
Assessing (1) and (3) required mathematical knowledge of the
course material. We therefore recruited two researchers who had
taken or audited the course and were familiar with the course


Guo et al.
(1) P2 lacked a clear strategy and 
entered several tentative steps.
(2) P2 received an error message as he expected, and he 
commented this message as confusing.
LeanSide Compiler
LeanSide could not verify step 4, 5, 6. Check the compiler panel for details.
(3) P2 searched the browser for “Frobenius norm trace” to find hints for 
getting started.
LeanSide Compiler
(4) A search result gave P2 an insight, 
prompting him to write a new proof.
(5) P2 received an error message and he commented it 
as understandable and accurate.
(6) P2 revised the proof, and all steps were verified. After confirming 
that each step matched his intent, he submitted the assignment.
Figure 5: An usage example of how student iterates on one problem from start to end
material. The two researchers independently judged 20% of the
sessions (6 participants). When disagreements arose, we consult
the course instructor to make the final decision. We refer to these
two researchers and the instructor as the expert group. For (2),
we used think-aloud data; when students did not comment, we
prompted them with questions such as “Do you think this claim is
actually what you meant?” and “Do you think this error message is
correct?”. We then made a binary judgment for each informalization.
For (4) and (5), we followed a reflexive thematic analysis approach,
beginning with inductive coding of a subset of sessions, iteratively
refining candidate codes and themes, and then using the resulting
themes to guide analysis of the remaining data.
6
An example of the system usage
To illustrate the complete interaction trajectory, we present an ex-
ample of one participant’s end-to-end interaction on a problem
that includes both helpful and unhelpful feedback. We also en-
courage the reader to watch the attached video figure for better
understanding about the user workflow. Participant 2 (P2) began
without a clear strategy and entered several tentative steps, includ-
ing repeated hypotheses and familiar facts. After clicking Verify, P2
received an error message that he found confusing and unhelpful
for making progress (reasons in Section 7.2.2), so he searched the
browser for guidance. He identified a plausible strategy, rewrote the
proof on paper, and uploaded it again. In subsequent iterations, P2
judged the feedback as accurate, corrected a step accordingly, and
eventually verified every step. A top banner then prompted him to
check whether each system interpretation matched his intent; after
checking every step, he submitted the assignment.
7
Prerequisites for natural-language access to
verification
We listed faithfulness and accuracy as the requirement for Lean to
be accessible through natural language, thus, in this section, we
evaluate the system’s performance on these two criteria. The expert
group manually reviewed all natural-language proofs produced in
the user studies and the generated Lean code from all study sessions.
This section reports the system’s performance. Figure 6 shows the
whole proof performance (left), and the step-wise performance
(right). In this figure and the following sections, we use correct and
incorrect to denote the expert assessment of a student step’s ground
truth correctness; accurate and inaccurate to denote whether the
system’s judgment matches that ground truth; and faithful and
unfaithful to denote whether the auto-formalization preserves the
student’s original input.
For whole-proof performance (Figure 6, left), we collected 137
proofs: 56 (41%) were fully correct, 57 (42%) contained at least
one erroneous step, and 24 (18%) had only correct steps but were
incomplete. The system maintained a very low false-positive rate
for detecting incorrect and incomplete proofs, while marking 11/56
(20%) fully correct proofs (according to the rubric) as containing an
error and 4/56 (7%)fully correct proofs as incomplete.


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
137 proofs
1159 steps
Whole proof performance
Expert assessment 
of ground truth 
correctness
[correct, incorrect, 
incomplete]
System 
Performance on 
accuracy
[accurate, inaccurate]
57 proofs accurately 
marked as incorrect
57 proofs 
incorrect
11 proofs inaccurately 
marked as incorrect
56 proofs
fully correct
41 proofs accurately 
marked as correct
4 proofs inaccurately 
marked as incomplete
24 proofs
incomplete
22 proofs accurately 
marked as incomplete
2 proofs inaccurately 
marked as complete
137 proofs
1159 steps
Step-wise performance
Expert assessment 
of ground truth 
correctness
[correct, incorrect, 
incomplete]
System 
Performance on 
faithfulness
[faithful, unfaithful]
System 
Performance on 
accuracy
[accurate, inaccurate]
22 incorrect 
& unfaithful 
117 incorrect 
steps
95 incorrect 
& faithful 
1020 correct steps 
are auto-formalized 
and informalized 
faithfully
1038 correct 
steps
18 correct & 
unfaithful steps
4 steps too 
ambiguous
2 incorrect steps are 
judged inaccurately
93 incorrect steps are 
judged accurately
40 correct steps are 
judged inaccuratly
980 correct steps are 
judged accurately
Figure 6: This figure shows the system’s faithfulness and accuracy performance: the left side shows whole-proof performance,
and the right side shows step-level performance. We use correct and incorrect for expert-assessed ground truth, accurate
and inaccurate for whether the system’s judgment matches that ground truth, and faithful and unfaithful for whether
auto-formalization preserves the student’s original input.
As the faithfulness and accuracy is measured by steps, we also
calculate the total number of steps1 demonstrated in Figure 6, right.
In total, serving as ground truth, we have 1038 expert evaluated
correct steps, 117 (11%) wrong steps and 4 steps which are too
ambiguous to judge correctness. The correct number is more than
incorrect ones as in an incorrect proof, there is often only one or a
few steps are wrong, while the rest steps are valid. The following
paragraphs evaluate step-level performance and explain the reasons
for unfaithfulness and inaccuracy.
7.1
System performance on faithfulness
Expert group judged that 18/1038 (2%) of correct steps and 22/117
(18%) of incorrect steps are unfaithful. Most unfaithful cases arose
during auto-formalization. Three cases involved errors in both
auto-formalization and informalization, and one edge case due to
informalization unfaithfulness alone.
Auto-formalization unfaithfulness had two main causes. One
common cause (12 cases) occurred when a student made a small
error in an incorrect step, such as omitting a transpose and therefore
multiplying matrices with incompatible dimensions. When the
proof scaffolder module (Section 4.1.2) tried to auto-formalize the
step, the Lean statement could not compile unless this error was
fixed, causing the scaffolder’s compiler-guided loop automatically
corrected it. Despite the scaffolder prompt’s instruction to preserve
the student’s meaning even when it is incorrect, these small formal
invalidities were the pipeline’s most likely source of unfaithful auto-
correction. Section 8.1.2 explains how does student judge whether
1the steps used here is measured by minimal independent step defined in the Section
4.1.1, as the student divided step do not have a fix size, some student put all reasoning
in one cell, while some put each one equation in one cell, so to avoid inconsistency,
the system performance is measured using the minimal independent step.
the auto-formalization of one step is unfaithful and Section 8.2.4
further explains what does the student do when facing unfaithful
auto-formalized steps.
The second cause occurred when students wrote steps that were
vague or ambiguous along one of the three ambiguity types, math-
ematically trivial, or not intrinsically propositional, and the auto-
formalization produced a stronger claim that human evaluators
judged inconsistent with the student’s intended meaning. Section
8.2.2 explains how student make use of these stronger claims to
progress on their proofs.
7.2
System performance on accuracy
7.2.1
Step-wise accuracy. Measuring accuracy for unfaithful steps
is not reasonable, so the accuracy is only measured within the
faithful steps. Expert judge that for 40/1020 (4%) of correct steps,
the system is being extra stingy or not accurate and judged correct
step as wrong. The expert group judged step-level accuracy with
respect to each question’s rubric: if a student step was more granular
than a rubric item, the step was judged incorrect even when it was
mathematically valid.
Inaccuracy had two main causes. First, the prover (Section 4.1.3)
sometimes failed to prove a mathematically valid proposition at the
expected granularity, either because the step followed an uncom-
mon proof strategy that had not been tested when constructing the
mini-lemma library, or because the step was mathematically valid
but not relevant to any solution strategy. In both cases, because
the mini-lemma library was built around expected solution paths,
it did not contain the lemmas needed to prove the step. Since our
prover prioritizes responsiveness over proving arbitrary mathemat-
ical propositions, these steps failed to verify.


Guo et al.
Second, students sometimes did not explicitly declare the types
or dimensions of new variables. For example, in a problem involving
singular value decomposition, a student might write 𝑃= 𝑈Σ𝑉with-
out specifying the types and dimensions of 𝑈, Σ, and 𝑉; the proof
scaffolder could then formalize them as arbitrary variables, such as
real numbers. Although humans often omit these details as unspo-
ken conventions, the system may fail under this under-specification.
This case could be classified as either unfaithful or inaccurate; here,
we label it inaccurate. For both causes, we expect the inaccuracy
rate to decrease as the underlying technology improves. Section
8.1.1 further explains how the student judge whether the system
accurately judged their step.
In theory, the system would never judge an faithfully auto-
formalized incorrect step as correct, as lean would never able to
compile it, however, in real usage, there is one edge case which
judged incorrect step as correct, because that step has been wrongly
classified as an assumption—repeat known, as mentioned in Section
4.1.2, the repeat known assumptions are not formally verified.
7.2.2
Error-message understandability. Even when the system accu-
rately judged a step’s correctness, its error message did not always
explain the mistake in an understandable way. The expert group
therefore separately evaluated whether each error message iden-
tified the step’s mistake in the way a human collaborator would.
To isolate the usefulness of the Lean error itself from the pedagog-
ical value of an LLM, the informalizer prompt included only the
Lean error message and Lean lemma declaration, not the student’s
original proof.
We evaluated the understandability of each feedback types. Ex-
pert judges found that 61/97 (63%) of step-level error messages
accurately reflected what was wrong in the step, compared with
3/13 (23%) of continuation error messages and (11/13)85% of con-
tinuation next-step hints.
Step-level error messages were difficult to understand mainly
because of a granularity mismatch. When students wrote a state-
ment as a single assertion, they often treated it as not needing
further explanation in the course context. Lean errors, however,
often reflected failures in lower-level proof obligations, making the
feedback more granular than the student’s step, thus not under-
standable.
Continuation error messages had a similar limitation: when the
proof assembler failed to complete the Lean code for the proof, it
returned a reason why the whole proof was not closed, but this
reason was not necessarily at the user’s granularity. By contrast,
continuation next-step hints were more understandable because
they were informalized from the mini-lemma library, which was
mapped to rubric items and designed to stay within the course
context.
8
User study findings
This section examines how students unable to author Lean proofs
independently accessed Lean-backed verification through LeanSide.
We report on (1) how students assessed the system’s faithfulness
and accuracy, (2) when they progressed or got stuck, and (3) when
the interaction increased their confidence.
In each iteration, students fell into one of three outcomes: they
made progress, became stuck or diverted, or, when facing possi-
bly inaccurate feedback, they re-verified the same proof or added
more details to help the system understand their proof. Students
submitted 137 proofs across 50 problems. After excluding final
submissions that did not lead to another iteration, we coded 87
iterations (Figure 7): 52 (58%) led to effective progress, 25 (29%)
were not useful or involved getting stuck or diverted, and 11 (13%)
involved reverification or adding more granular details to support
the prover.
8.1
Could participants assess the system’s
accuracy and faithfulness?
To revise their proofs using system feedback, participants first
needed to judge whether the feedback faithfully represented their
reasoning and was mathematically accurate. We compared their
judgments with those of our expert group. Agreement was high:
participants matched the experts on 87% of faithful steps and 83%
of unfaithful steps, as well as 91% of accurate feedback and 99% of
inaccurate feedback.
8.1.1
How do participants judge a claim as inaccurate? We observed
two main ways students identified inaccurate step-level or contin-
uation error messages. Most commonly, students relied on their
own mathematical judgment, especially when the disputed step
was easy to verify from the local context — for example, when it
directly applied a theorem taught in class. Lean could nevertheless
fail to verify such steps when the required theorem was absent from
Mathlib or our mini lemma library (Section 4.1.3), or when a trivial
informal claim required a non-trivial formal proof. Thus, steps that
students considered easy were not always easy for Lean to verify.
P2, P11, P19 all encountered steps that they were confident were
correct despite receiving error messages. P11 explained this local
judgment process:
I might not be confident that the whole proof
is correct, but it’s much easier to decide if
one step is correct. When I first look at the
error, I will try to diagnose whether the error
is on my side or on the system’s side. The
error message is local to the claim, so if I can
confirm the claim is correct, then I will assume
it’s a system error.
Second, students recognized an error message as inaccurate
when it clearly fell outside the local mathematical context or oper-
ated at a finer granularity than their intended proof. One example is
the inaccurate continuation error message discussed in Section 8.3.2
and shown in Figure 11.
Without either cue, students had less basis for evaluating the
feedback and were more likely to pursue an incorrect direction.
When students judged an error message as inaccurate (11 itera-
tions), they either (1) re-verified the same input in the hope that
the prover would verify it, (2) added more detail to help the prover,
or (3) stopped once they had localized the issue to a step they were
confident was correct.
8.1.2
How do participants judge a claim is unfaithful? Students
primarily judged faithfulness by assessing whether their original


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
Figure 7: Distribution of coded revision outcomes. Most iterations led to progress (52 iterations, 58.6%), while 25 iterations
(28.7%) were not useful, involved getting stuck, or diverted students from productive proof paths, and 11 iterations (12.6%)
involved reverifying or adding under-granular details. The labels show the progress and breakdown types analyzed in this
section.
LeanSide could not verify step 3, 4. Check the compiler panel for details.
LeanSide Compiler
Figure 8: This figure shows an understandable and accurate
error message output by the system.
idea and the informalization were mathematically equivalent or
could be trivially converted into each other. In practice, this often
began with noticing that the informalization “looked different”
from their original input. However, informalizations rarely looked
exactly the same as the input, even when they were faithful. Thus,
judging faithfulness required students to use their mathematical
knowledge to decide whether the input and output were equivalent.
We observed three cases in which students did not notice that a
claim was unfaithful, all of which led to unproductive iterations.
This usually occurred when the system proved an unfaithful claim
and marked the step as correct, causing the indicator beside the
step to appear green . Students typically paid more attention to
gray steps with error messages and revised those steps first, as
a result, they sometimes missed the unfaithful claims. In Section
9.4, we discuss the design challenge of prompting users to check
faithfulness, as well as the design decisions we explored and their
effects on users’ attention to faithfulness.
8.2
How do participants make progress?
8.2.1
Progress type 1: Repairing proofs with accurate, understand-
able step-wise or continuation error message (23 iterations). A com-
mon starting point was a proof containing error(s) the student had
not recognized. Step-level error messages, when accurate and un-
derstandable, helped students repair both major misconceptions
and subtle mistakes. For Q13, P12 overlooked a key constraint (Fig-
ure 8. The error message drew attention to this omission: “Oh right!
Because 𝑥⊤is also supposed to be orthogonal to the first eigenvector,
it actually can’t be 𝜆0.” P12 then revised the proof strategy. The
system also caught subtle errors, of which we include an example
in Appendix B.
Understandable continuation error messages could similarly help
students complete unfinished proofs. These messages were gener-
ally effective when students had already made valid progress and
needed only one or two additional rubric items. For Q8, P2 recog-
nized that the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality was relevant but did not
know how to apply it. The continuation error message explained
its role, allowing P2 to close the logical gap and continue the proof
(More details about this example is explained in Appendix B).
8.2.2
Progress type 2: Making high-level ideas more rigorous through
informalization and ambiguity resolution (9 iterations). Students also
began with a conceptual intuition but were unsure how to express
it mathematically. After first reading a problem, P27 explained, It’s
hard for me to translate an expression before I have fully formulated
my thinking.” Students therefore submitted descriptive or tentative
reasoning and used the system’s interpretation to develop it. P14
described a proof as fairly conceptual,” adding, Even in the exam,
maybe the grader would not accept that, but maybe a mathematician
will say this looks good. Maybe demonstrate this part more clearly.”
Similarly, P12 wrote, This proof is hand-wavy and I yap a lot. Let’s
see what the system says and we could iterate.” The system helped
students turn such ambiguous expressions into rigorous arguments
in two ways.
First, when an expression matched one of the three ambiguity
types described in Section 4.1.1, the interface displayed the system’s
predicted interpretation for students to inspect. Even incorrect pre-
dictions were useful because they revealed where an expression
had confused the system. For example, in several cases (P2, P22,
P24, and P26), action labels in the informalization cells helped stu-
dents assess whether their intent had been captured. P26 initially
wondered, I am not sure whether the system could understand I’m
repeating the definition, or should I delete these steps?” Seeing the


Guo et al.
LeanSide could not verify step 2, 3, 4, 5. Check the compiler panel for details.
LeanSide Compiler
LeanSide Compiler
Figure 9: This figure shows an accurate but less understand-
able error messages of step 2 and 3.
“Repeat Known” label confirmed that the system had understood
the step. In two cases, antecedent, consequent and evidence ambigu-
ity resolution also helped (P19, P4). For example, P19 used “Hence”
twice in one step, but the first instance referred to earlier reasoning
rather than the immediately preceding step. The generated proposi-
tion did not match his intent, revealing the ambiguous antecedent.
P19 therefore noticed and resolved this ambiguity.
Second, informalization helped students develop conceptual
ideas that fell outside these predefined ambiguity types. For Q13
(Appendix A), P18 input an ambiguous, high level proof idea into
the system with some missed cases:
Since the quadratic form 𝑦𝑇𝐴𝑦= Í𝑛−1
𝑖=0 𝜆𝑖(𝑦·
𝑒𝑖)2, we know that the weight assigned to
each eigenvalue is the dot product between
𝑦and the corresponding eigenvector. When
𝑦= 𝑣1, this means all the weight is assigned
to 𝜆1. In other scenarios, the weight is dis-
tributed across the other eigenvectors. How-
ever, in these other cases, it is strictly better to
allocate more weight to the largest eigenvec-
tor since doing so yields the largest weighted
sum.
These steps were not mathematically precise statements, but were
along a path that could get to a rigorous proof. The informalization
solidified the student intuition through propositions propositions
representing the weight allocation process and normalization con-
straint on the weights, and suggested a rigorous approach to the
proof. P18 commented that this “makes the proof more robust.”
8.2.3
Progress type 3: Advancing with continuation hints and large-
jump warnings (6 iterations). Students sometimes became stuck
midway through an argument or did not know how to begin. They
therefore entered given conditions or potentially relevant theorems
as tentative starting points. When these preliminary steps were
correct, the system could return informalized future proof steps as
a continuation hint. As reported in Section 7.2.2, these hints were
generally understandable, and six students used them to make valid
progress (Appendix B).
Unexpectedly, students also used large-jump warnings to ad-
vance incomplete proofs. This occurred when a student included
the conclusion as the final step without providing a complete argu-
ment. Particularly for simpler problems, the prover could justify the
LeanSide could not verify step 3, 4. Check the compiler panel for 
details.
LeanSide Compiler
Figure 10: This figure shows a comparison between the Lean-
Side error message and an LLM output with the same problem
and answer.
conclusion within that step and return a large-jump warning expos-
ing the missing intermediate reasoning. These warnings therefore
functioned similarly to continuation hints. Appendix B display one
such example.
Overall, students described next-step hints, including those pre-
sented as warnings, more understandable and helpful than contin-
uation error messages. They described it as directly actionable: “It
tells me how to do it” (P4), “It’s kind of funny that this seems a lot of
help, seems like these are alternatives, not do all of them” (P11), and
“This is definitely very helpful” (P18).
8.2.4
Progress type 4: Discovering mistakes through unfaithful auto-
corrections (11 iterations). As described in Section 7.1, the autofor-
malizer sometimes unfaithfully corrected local mistakes. Students
discovered their error by noticing that the informalized verified
proposition differed from their input step. These errors were typi-
cally small, such as omitting a transpose and thereby multiplying
matrices with incompatible dimensions.
8.2.5
Progress type 5: Resolving difficult feedback with external
resources (11 iterations). Students could still progress when feedback
was accurate but less understandable than human-tutor feedback
(Section 7.2.2), although doing so required more time and greater
reliance on external resources such as browsers and textbooks. For
Q12 (Figure 9, P20 was confident that a matrix has a positive norm
and therefore rejected the step 2 message with comments “∥𝑄∥
is not a defined operation.” P20 searched, “Can you take the norm
of a non-square matrix?” and treated an AI-generated overview
beginning with “Yes, you can...” as confirmation without reading
further. However, the step 3 message—“a matrix and a single number
cannot be equal”—prompted P20 to reconsider. Returning to the
search results, P20 read that the answer referred to specific norms,
“...such as the Frobenius and induced operator norms,” and recognized
that the step 2 message was correct.
8.3
When do students get stuck or divert from
correct directions?
8.3.1
Stuck type 1: Struggling with accurate but hard-to-understand
feedback (16 cases). One common source of not understandable
feedback, discussed in Section 7.2.2, was a mismatch in granularity:
Lean exposed low-level proof obligations for steps that students
considered sufficiently explained. Students then struggled to con-
nect the feedback to the higher-level flaw. For example, Figure 10
shows such an error message. P12 spent additional time searching
lecture notes to understand the issue. By contrast, when given the


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
Iteration 1: output a continuation error message
LeanSide Compiler
Iteration 2: output a continuation hint
Figure 11: This figure shows a comparison between an unhelp-
ful continuation error message and a useful continuation
hint. In the first iteration, the system generated a confusing
continuation error message; after the student re-verified the
same proof, the system produced a useful continuation hint.
same problem and solution, ChatGPT-4.0 identified the issue at a
higher level.
In contrast, human tutors can draw on pedagogical strategies
that our Lean-backed pipeline did not support, such as refuting
an invalid claim with a counterexample [22], diagnosing an issue
in the overall proof strategy rather than only the current step [3],
or explaining an unfamiliar idea through an analogy to familiar
knowledge [59].
8.3.2
Stuck type 2: Lacking a high-level proof strategy (7 cases).
Earlier, we showed that continuation hints and, less often, under-
standable continuation error messages could suggest plausible next
steps. This support was less effective when students had no devel-
oped proof strategy and submitted reasoning far from a complete
proof. In these cases, the proof assembler usually failed at an in-
cidental proof obligation, producing a low-level error rather than
the high-level strategy the student needed. P16’s attempt on Q12
illustrates the contrast (Figure 11). After restating several given
conditions, P16 became stuck. On the first run, the proof assembler
failed and produced a continuation error mentioning a “conjugate
transpose.” P16 rejected this message because the course considered
only real numbers and reran the same partial proof. On the sec-
ond run, the assembler completed the proof and returned a useful
continuation hint, which enabled P16 to progress.
Additionally, the system could not distinguish strategically useful
steps from all mathematically correct steps. Consequently, listing
every potentially relevant fact was ineffective. This problem was
compounded when a correct but irrelevant textbook fact fell outside
the mini lemma library and was marked unverified, misleading
students into thinking that the fact itself was incorrect.
8.3.3
Diversion: Struggling to evaluate or act on local feedback (2
cases). The reason for students to drive into wrong direction is
insufficient math knowledge to react on a step-wise error message
no matter whether the message is accurate. For both cases where (1)
the student’s step is correct, however the system is inaccurate and
failed to prove the step thus generate an error message, or (2) the
student’s step is indeed incorrect and thus the system generate an
error message, it would requires student’s knowledge to understand
and act upon the error message. In two cases, Students followed
the misleading feedback or misunderstand an accurate feedback.
8.4
Participants gained confidence from the
verified results
A central motivation for formal verification is confidence in logical
validity. We therefore assessed whether the system could carry this
benefit into a natural-language interface by asking students to rate
their confidence in each proof on a 1–5 scale and explain their rea-
sons. We observed that when the system displayed a whole proof
as verified for a proof that students were not confident in, their con-
fidence did not immediately increase. Instead, confidence increased
substantially as students checked whether each step matched their
intended meaning, especially for steps they judged to be both faith-
fully translated and verified (P2, P4, P9, P11, P26). P4 commented,
“I feel extremely confident that this is correct because it is verified,”,
P2 and P11 said they trusted the system when it marked a step as
correct. P26 added, “I trust that my steps are rigorous for the verified
claims more than LLM.”
Students gradually gained trust through the process of check-
ing that each informalized claim faithfully represented what they
meant. Confidence increased especially when a step they had sus-
pected might contain a gap was verified but accompanied by a
large-jump warning or a continuation suggestion that clarified the
missing details. For example, before verification, P9 rated their con-
fidence as 2. Seeing that the proof was verified did not immediately
increase this confidence: “Oh, it says it’s correct, that’s surprising.”
However, after checking that each step matched their intent and
seeing that the uncertain step had a large-jump warning explaining
the missing details, P9 became more confident in the proof. We also
observed that P6, P9, and P13 became gradually more confident
as they corrected mistakes or resolved ambiguous parts of their
proofs.
8.5
Could students obtain extra information
from reading Lean code?
To evaluate whether Lean code provided useful information beyond
the interface, we invited students during the post-interview to read
the generated Lean code. After a five-minute introduction to basic
syntax, students read one proof lemma corresponding to one of
their steps and could ask clarification to any part of the code. We
then asked whether the code provided any helpful information not
already shown in the interface.
Overall, 20 of 23 students said it was useful to know that code
existed behind the feedback, but that reading the code did not give
them additional information they needed. P4 commented that the
Lean code felt unfamiliar and that “if it were just me, I would never
open the panel and try to read the code.” P11 said the language was
daunting and that, even with instructions, they could mostly read
only the comments. P14 similarly commented, “I trust the system
more because I know there is code behind, but for now, I did not get
much extra information from it.”
The remaining three students found the comments inside the
Lean lemmas useful. In all three cases, students had written steps


Guo et al.
that were verified but were not fully sure why the steps were correct.
For P6, the system verified all steps, but P6 remained unsure about
the evidence supporting one of the steps. P6 commented that the
feedback “tells me it is correct, but I don’t know how it is correct.” After
opening the Lean code panel, the comments helped P6 understand
the evidence and gain confidence. P24 used the comments in the
Lean Code to discover that a verified step was true only for a trivial
reason: both sides reduced to 0 = 0, rather than for the reason the
student intended. P7 used the comments to interpret a confusing
large-jump warning: the step was circular because the prover had
used the final conclusion to prove it. After reading the comments,
the warning became understandable. The comments in the Lean
code represent a detailed logic trace below the user’s granularity.
These three cases show the potential usefulness of such traces and
students’ trust in them.
9
Discussion
In the previous section, we summarized students’ perceptions of
the system: whether they could accurately assess system perfor-
mance, when they were able to make progress, when they became
stuck or diverted, and how their confidence changed. Here, we
examine what explains these results. We distinguish findings that
stem from current technical limitations from findings shaped by
formally verified languages’ properties and our design choices.
We then discuss design implications for future formally verified
co-reasoning (FVCR) systems, including the limitation of formal
languages, the design strategies that may address them, and the
open challenges that remain. Table 1 summarizes five capabilities
that a co-reasoning system may need and compares our system
with the support provided by an LLM-based assistant and a formal
debugger.
9.1
What results stem from technical
limitations?
LeanSide was developed under the cost constraints of a classroom
deployment, so each verification was optimized for responsive-
ness and resource use. Recent commercial auto-formalizers [1]
report higher success rates in generating compiling proofs for cor-
rect Lean statements. Plugging stronger models into the pipeline
would likely improve accuracy by reducing false negatives, and
may also slightly reduce unfaithfulness. By contrast, we do not
expect stronger provers to substantially change error-message un-
derstandability or most student behaviors around making progress
or getting stuck, as these are more closely tied to the nature of
formal verification and our system design choices.
9.2
What could an FVCR system provide?
We view an FVCR system like LeanSide could contributes four re-
sources to a human-AI co-reasoning system: preserving the user’s
reasoning path, providing low-false-positive validity checks, pro-
ducing hallucination-free reasoning feedback, and helping users
iteratively make implicit reasoning explicit.
First, our findings show that LeanSide can help preserve user
agency through faithful representation. Although we observed
edge cases where the system unfaithfully auto-corrected step-level
mistakes, LeanSide usually followed the user’s reasoning at the
user’s granularity. This was not due to formal verification alone,
but our system design choice for step-by-step auto-formalization.
Prior work in human-AI collaboration has shown that LLM out-
puts can introduce useful directions, but can also unintentionally
distract users from their original initiative [34, 46]. Plausible but
misaligned outputs can pull users away from their original line
of reasoning, forcing them to monitor and repair the system or
follow its suggested direction [17, 62, 89]. An FVCR system can
reduce this risk by designing the system to always follow the user’s
reasoning path. In our system, the unit of preservation is the pre-
processed smallest progression unit: we do not require the system
to preserve lower-level decompositions inside that unit. This unit is
context-dependent and can be customized to the reasoning task. For
example, in a tax-reasoning system, the unit might be one claimed
inference: given a taxpayer’s income, deductions, filing status, or
transaction history, the system would preserve the user’s intended
application of a specific tax rule and then verify whether the stated
tax consequence follows.
Second, our findings also shows an FVCR system can help local-
ize errors through low-false-positive feedback. Hallucination
remains a persistent concern in high-stakes reasoning domains.
LLM feedback can be unreliable in these settings because it may
sound plausible while being logically wrong [8, 42, 88]. A formally
verified backend can instead provide a stronger basis for accepting
a step or conclusion when the translation is faithful. In our system,
verified steps helped students narrow down the issue: once a step
was verified, students gained confidence in its validity and could
focus on unverified steps to correct faulty logic or fill the gaps. This
process continued until all steps were verified, or until students
used their mathematical knowledge to judge that a remaining un-
verified step reflected prover failure rather than their own error, as
described in Section 7.2.
Third, an FVCR system can provide verified reasoning sug-
gestions. In our system, these traces appeared as continuation
hints and as informal comments in the Lean code panel explaining
how a step was proved. Both were natural-language explanations
grounded in verified reasoning, and both were proven to be useful
to students. Similar opportunities may arise in other reasoning
tasks where users need more than a validity check mark: they also
need natural-language explanations of why a step follows.
Finally, an FVCR system can help users make implicit reason-
ing explicit. In our study, students often entered high-level or
ambiguous reasoning, while the system returned less ambiguous
informalizations at the user’s granularity. By comparing their input
with these interpretations, students could notice ambiguity, clarify
assumptions, and make their reasoning more rigorous. This sug-
gests that formal verification can serve not only as a checker, but
also as a mirror for helping users refine high-level strategies into
precise reasoning.
9.3
LeanSide Limitations, and Design
Implications for Future FVCR Systems
LeanSide was designed to isolate how formal language can sup-
port students’ proof iteration. Some of its limitations therefore
come from deliberate design choices, which could help explain why
students became stuck or diverged.


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
Table 1: Capabilities of different reasoning systems.
Capability
LLM-based assistant
Formal debugger
Lean-backed system
Low-threshold interaction
✓
×
✓
Preserve faithfulness and user agency
Not deterministic
✓
✓
Validity check for informal reasoning
Not deterministic
×
✓
Verified reasoning explanations
Not deterministic
×
✓
Provide high-level conceptual guidance
✓
×
×
First, Lean error messages can reflect overly-granular reason-
ing, which can confuse users. The limited understandability of
step-level error messages illustrates this limitation. When students
wrote a statement as a single assertion, they often treated it as not
requiring further explanation in the course context. Lean errors,
however, often reflected failures in lower-level proof obligations,
making the feedback more granular than the student’s step and
harder to interpret. This mismatch is difficult to solve through
the Lean backbone alone. Complementary methods, such as sam-
pling counterexamples or using an LLM to generate higher-level
pedagogical and tutor-like feedback, can help produce more use-
ful explanations (formal verification could also be used to check
whether the LLM generated feedback before showing it to users).
The second limitation is that Lean may not follow the same
strategic trace as human intuition. In our study, students found
the system useful for narrowing down local issues, but less able to
guide them toward the right overall strategy. When a student fol-
lowed an unproductive path, several mathematically correct steps
could appear before the first incorrect step; the system flagged
only the incorrect step, leaving the student to identify where the
proof had diverged strategically. This reflects a mismatch between
formal verification and human proof reasoning: Lean and search-
based provers do not necessarily follow the intuitive order in which
humans understand a proof, and may produce proofs that are coun-
terintuitive or difficult to read [82]. Strategic hint generation, such
as tree-search-based methods studied in existing tutoring systems,
could therefore complement the formal verification backbone.
Together, what FVCR systems can provide and where they are
limited offers guidance for future co-reasoning tool designers on
when to use an FVCR system. It also suggests that, when using
a formal verification system as the backbone, task-specific auxil-
iary components can add useful “meat” around formal verification,
varying by domain and interaction need.
9.4
Open design challenges: faithfulness
checking and auto-detecting contextual
granularity
One open design challenge is faithfulness checking. In figure 12,
we summarize users’ inspection of a collaborative system into two
categories (1) inspecting whether the system’s interpretation of the
presented task is faithful, and (2) inspecting whether the system’s
execution matches the user’s intent, which could be correspond to
gulf of execution and evaluation [69]. We view inspection in FVCR
systems as a special case of this broader inspection problem, one
that emphasizes (1) while placing less burden on (2).
Figure 12: This figure compares two inspection scenarios:
a general inspection scenario and inspection in an FVCR
system. In the general scenario, users must inspect both in-
terpretation and execution; in an FVCR system, the emphasis
is primarily on inspecting interpretation.
In LeanSide, the side-by-side comparison between user input
and system interpretation in the informalization panel makes faith-
fulness inspection explicit. The open design challenge is how to
make these checks lightweight enough to avoid tedious interaction,
while still keeping them visible enough to hold users’ attention.
We observed that students paid more attention to steps marked
gray with error messages than to steps marked green, they did not
always check whether the system had correctly interpreted what
they meant in each sentence before everything is green.
To address this issue, our current design requires users to click
“this is what I meant” or “not what I meant” for every informalized
cell before submitting the assignment. If a user clicks “not what I
meant,” the step returns to gray and the student must clarify and
re-verify the proof. However, this design has limitations. Students
usually checked every step only after resolving all error messages
and preparing to submit the assignment. As a result, participants
sometimes ignored unfaithful interpretations during intermediate
iterations. However, an unfaithful earlier step could prevent later
causally related steps from being verified, increasing the likelihood
of inaccurate judgments and error messages for the later step. This
is one reason participants became stuck or moved in the wrong
direction, as discussed in Section 8.3.
We considered two alternative designs. First, after each verifi-
cation, the system could require students to confirm “this is what
I meant” or “not what I meant” before showing indicators and er-
ror messages. However, because informalizations often differ from
the student’s original wording even when they are faithful, this
interaction could become tedious. In addition, if a student clicked
“not what I meant,” the system would need to regenerate the Lean
interpretation, adding waiting time while leaving open the possi-
bility that the new interpretation would still be unfaithful. Second,


Guo et al.
Figure 13: Follow up questions asked by the system when a
student’s step is ambiguous
similar to existing LLM interfaces, the system could ask follow-up
questions when the student’s input is ambiguous. We implemented
this feature in the interface shown in Figure 13, but because it adds
complexity beyond the scope of the present study, we leave its
evaluation to future work.
Another open design challenge is auto-detecting contextual
granularity. Human users, such as students, often learn the accept-
able granularity of reasoning from surrounding context, including
lectures, peer discussion, and grading expectations, without anyone
stating it explicitly. By contrast, LeanSide required substantial effort
to construct a mini-lemma library that encoded this granularity,
through rubric lemmas and side lemmas. Even with an automated
pipeline, experts still had to inspect whether the specified granu-
larity was appropriate. In mathematics education, this granularity
is relatively visible because rubrics exist for each problem; in many
other reasoning tasks, it may be far more implicit. A key open chal-
lenge for co-reasoning systems is therefore how they can learn the
user’s expected granularity for communicating reasoning.
10
Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, the participant population
was relatively homogeneous: all participants were recruited from
the same university, and many were majoring in Computer Science,
Mathematics, or related fields. This composition was partly a con-
sequence of the course in which we deployed the system. Although
none of the participants had prior experience with Lean, they may
have been more familiar with formal verification than the general
population and therefore more inclined to trust the verification re-
sults. In addition, their disciplinary training may have helped them
express informal reasoning more precisely, making their inputs less
ambiguous than those of general users.
Second, the problems selected for this study represent only a
limited subset of mathematical reasoning, focusing primarily on
Linear Algebra and Optimization. This choice was motivated by
two factors: (1) the deployment course focused on Linear Algebra,
and (2) the current auto-formalization and prover modules perform
more reliably in these domains. Consequently, the observed results
may not generalize to other areas of mathematics, where users may
exhibit different input behaviors and where the system may face
additional challenges.
References
[1] Tudor Achim, Alex Best, Alberto Bietti, Kevin Der, Math"is F’ed’erico, Sergei
Gukov, Daniel Halpern-Leistner, Kirsten Henningsgard, Yury Kudryashov,
Alexander Meiburg, Martin Michelsen, Riley Patterson, Eric Rodriguez, Laura
Scharff, Vikram Shanker, Vladmir Sicca, Hari Sowrirajan, Aidan Swope, Matyas
Tamas, Vlad Tenev, Jonathan Thomm, Harold Williams, and Lawrence Wu. 2025.
Aristotle: IMO-Level Automated Theorem Proving. arXiv:2510.01346 [cs.AI]
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.01346
[2] Jonathan Aldrich, Robert J Simmons, and Key Shin. 2008. SASyLF: An educa-
tional proof assistant for language theory. In Proceedings of the 2008 international
workshop on Functional and declarative programming in education. 31–40.
[3] Serge Autexier, Dominik Dietrich, and Marvin Schiller. 2012. Towards an
Intelligent Tutor for Mathematical Proofs. Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
Computer Science 79 (2012), 1–28. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.79.1
[4] Zhangir Azerbayev, Bartosz Piotrowski, Hailey Schoelkopf, Edward W Ayers,
Dragomir Radev, and Jeremy Avigad. 2023. Proofnet: Autoformalizing and for-
mally proving undergraduate-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12433
(2023).
[5] Shraddha Barke, Michael B James, and Nadia Polikarpova. 2023. Grounded
copilot: How programmers interact with code-generating models. Proceedings
of the ACM on Programming Languages 7, OOPSLA1 (2023), 85–111.
[6] Bruno Barras, Samuel Boutin, Cristina Cornes, Judicaël Courant, Jean-
Christophe Filliâtre, Eduardo Giménez, Héctor Herbelin, Gérard Mohring,
Amokrane Saïbi, and Benjamin Werner. 1997. The Coq Proof Assistant Ref-
erence Manual: Version 6.1. Technical Report RT-0203. INRIA.
[7] Christoph Benzmüller, Helmut Horacek, Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova, Manfred
Pinkal, Jörg Siekmann, and Magdalena Wolska. 2007. Natural language dialog
with a tutor system for mathematical proofs. In Cognitive Systems: Joint Chinese-
German Workshop, Shanghai, China, March 7-11, 2005, Revised Selected Papers.
Springer, 1–14.
[8] Jessica Y Bo, Sophia Wan, and Ashton Anderson. 2025. To rely or not to rely?
evaluating interventions for appropriate reliance on large language models. In
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–23.
[9] Kevin Buzzard and Jon Eugster. 2023. The Natural Number Game. Interactive
Lean 4 game. Accessed: 2026-09-11. https://adam.math.hhu.de/#/g/leanprover-
community/NNG4
[10] Rafael Cabral, Tuan Manh Do, Xuejun Yu, Wai Ming Tai, Zijin Feng, and Xin
Shen. 2025. ProofFlow: A Dependency Graph Approach to Faithful Proof
Autoformalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15981 (2025).
[11] Eason Chen, Sophia Judicke, Kayla Beigh, Xinyi Tang, Isabel Wang, Nina Yuan,
Zimo Xiao, Chuangji Li, Shizhuo Li, Reed Luttmer, et al. 2026. Chat-based
support alone may not be enough: comparing conversational and embedded
LLM feedback for mathematical proof learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.18807
(2026).
[12] Furui Cheng, Vilém Zouhar, Simran Arora, Mrinmaya Sachan, Hendrik Strobelt,
and Mennatallah El-Assady. 2024. Relic: Investigating large language model
responses using self-consistency. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI conference on
human factors in computing systems. 1–18.
[13] Herbert H Clark and Susan E Brennan. 1991. Grounding in communication.
(1991).
[14] Herbert H Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Referring as a collaborative
process. Cognition 22, 1 (1986), 1–39.
[15] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun,
Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano,
et al. 2021.
Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
URL
https://arxiv. org/abs/2110.14168 9 (2021).
[16] Rob Cornish, Iacopo Ghinassi, Po-Hung Yeh, Shuqi Liu, Qiyuan Xu, Haoxuan
Yin, Dominik Wagner, Wenda Li, Yee Whye Teh, and Luke Ong. 2026. Faith-
formBench: Benchmarking Faithfulness of Mathematical Chain-of-Thought
Autoformalisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.10916 (2026).
[17] Laura Cros Vila and Bob Sturm. 2025. (Mis)Communicating with our AI Systems.
In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. Article 416, 9 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713771
[18] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and
Programming Language. In International Conference on Automated Deduction.
Springer, 625–635.
[19] Fiona Draxler, Anna Werner, Florian Lehmann, Matthias Hoppe, Albrecht
Schmidt, Daniel Buschek, and Robin Welsch. 2024. The AI ghostwriter effect:
When users do not perceive ownership of AI-generated text but self-declare as
authors. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 2 (2024), 1–40.
[20] Kasra Ferdowsi, Ruanqianqian Huang, Michael B James, Nadia Polikarpova,
and Sorin Lerner. 2024. Validating AI-generated code with live programming.
In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–8.
[21] Guoxiong Gao, Yutong Wang, Jiedong Jiang, Qi Gao, Zihan Qin, Tianyi Xu, and
Bin Dong. 2024. Herald: A natural language annotated Lean 4 dataset. arXiv


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
preprint arXiv:2410.10878 (2024).
[22] Eusthathios Giannakoulias, Eleutherios Mastorides, Despina Potari, and Theo-
dossios Zachariades. 2010. Studying Teachers’ Mathematical Argumentation in
the Context of Refuting Students’ Invalid Claims. The Journal of Mathematical
Behavior 29, 3 (2010), 160–168. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2010.07.001
[23] Google DeepMind. 2024. AI Achieves Silver-Medal Standard Solving Inter-
national Mathematical Olympiad Problems. https://deepmind.google/blog/ai-
solves-imo-problems-at-silver-medal-level/. Accessed September 11, 2026.
[24] Neel Guha, Julian Nyarko, Daniel Ho, Christopher Ré, Adam Chilton, Alex
Chohlas-Wood, Austin Peters, Brandon Waldon, Daniel Rockmore, Diego Zam-
brano, et al. 2023. Legalbench: A collaboratively built benchmark for measuring
legal reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information
processing systems 36 (2023), 44123–44279.
[25] Chenjun Guo, Manooshree Patel, Bjoern Hartmann, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira,
Sarah Chasins, and Gireeja Ranade. 2025. Unspoken Logic: Understanding and
bridging the gap between free-form and LLM-interpretable natural language
mathematical proofs. In The 5th Workshop on Mathematical Reasoning and AI at
NeurIPS 2025.
[26] Chenjun Guo, Manooshree Patel, Arnav Mehta, Rayna Bhattacharyya, Thomas
Lu, Niels Voss, Bjoern Hartmann, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Sarah Chasins, and
Gireeja Ranade. [n. d.]. Bridging the gap to autoformalize free-form human
reasoning. Plateau Workshop.
[27] Gila Hanna, David A Reid, and Michael De Villiers. 2019. Proof technology in
mathematics research and teaching. Springer.
[28] Mohammad Hekmatnejad, Andrew M. Simms, and Georgios Fainekos. 2019.
Model Checking Clinical Decision Support Systems Using SMT. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.04545 (v2, revised 4 March 2019). arXiv:1901.04545 [cs.SE] doi:10.
48550/arXiv.1901.04545
[29] Maxim Hendriks, Cezary Kaliszyk, Femke Van Raamsdonk, and Freek Wiedijk.
2010. Teaching logic using a state-of-the-art proof assistant. Acta Didactica
Napocensia 3, 2 (2010), 35–48.
[30] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart,
Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical
problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874 (2021).
[31] Martin Henz and Aquinas Hobor. 2011. Teaching experience: Logic and formal
methods with Coq. In International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs.
Springer, 199–215.
[32] Yinya Huang, Xiaohan Lin, Zhengying Liu, Qingxing Cao, Huajian Xin, Haiming
Wang, Zhenguo Li, Linqi Song, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. Mustard: Mastering
uniform synthesis of theorem and proof data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08957
(2024).
[33] Frederik Krogsdal Jacobsen and Jørgen Villadsen. 2023. On exams with the
Isabelle proof assistant. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05866 (2023).
[34] Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naa-
man. 2023. Co-writing with opinionated language models affects users’ views.
In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–15.
[35] Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii,
Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of hallucination
in natural language generation. ACM computing surveys 55, 12 (2023), 1–38.
[36] Albert Q Jiang, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik. 2023. Multilingual mathematical
autoformalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03755 (2023).
[37] Albert Q Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja
Jamnik, Timothée Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. 2022. Draft,
sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.12283 (2022).
[38] Ellen Jiang, Edwin Toh, Alejandra Molina, Kristen Olson, Claire Kayacik, Aaron
Donsbach, Carrie J. Cai, and Michael Terry. 2022. Discovering the Syntax and
Strategies of Natural Language Programming with Generative Language Models.
In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–19. doi:10.1145/3491102.3501870
[39] William Jurayj, Nils Holzenberger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2026.
Language Models and Logic Programs for Trustworthy Tax Reasoning.
arXiv:2508.21051 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21051
[40] Enkelejda Kasneci, Kathrin Seßler, Stefan Küchemann, Maria Bannert, Daryna
Dementieva, Frank Fischer, Urs Gasser, Georg Groh, Stephan Günnemann, Eyke
Hüllermeier, et al. 2023. ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges
of large language models for education. Learning and individual differences 103
(2023), 102274.
[41] Matthew Keenan and Cyrus Omar. 2024. Learner-Centered Design Criteria
for Classroom Proof Assistants. In Workshop on Human Aspects of Types and
Reasoning Assistants (HATRA).
https://hazel.org/papers/learner_centered_
proofs_hatra_2024.pdf
[42] Sunnie SY Kim, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Q Vera Liao, Tania Lombrozo,
and Olga Russakovsky. 2025. Fostering appropriate reliance on large language
models: The role of explanations, sources, and inconsistencies. In Proceedings
of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.
[43] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medenilla, Czarina Sillos, Lo-
rie De Leon, Camille Elepaño, Maria Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-
Candido, James Maningo, et al. 2023. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE:
potential for AI-assisted medical education using large language models. PLoS
digital health 2, 2 (2023), e0000198.
[44] Gabriel Rongyang Lau. 2026. Using the Aristotle API for AI-Assisted Theorem
Proving in Lean 4: A Formalisation Case Study of the Grasshopper Problem.
arXiv:2605.20120 https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20120
[45] Florian Leiser, Sven Eckhardt, Valentin Leuthe, Merlin Knaeble, Alexander Mäd-
che, Gerhard Schwabe, and Ali Sunyaev. 2024. Hill: A hallucination identifier
for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI conference on human
factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[46] Ariel Levy, Monica Agrawal, Arvind Satyanarayan, and David Sontag. 2021.
Assessing the impact of automated suggestions on decision making: Domain
experts mediate model errors but take less initiative. In Proceedings of the 2021
CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[47] Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan, Ethan Dyer, Henryk
Michalewski, Vinay Ramasesh, Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo
Gutman-Solo, et al. 2022. Solving quantitative reasoning problems with lan-
guage models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022),
3843–3857.
[48] Toby Jia-Jun Li, Jingya Chen, Haijun Xia, Tom M. Mitchell, and Brad A. Myers.
2020. Multi-Modal Repairs of Conversational Breakdowns in Task-Oriented
Dialogs. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. 1094–1107. doi:10.1145/3379337.3415820
[49] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser,
Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago,
et al. 2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science 378,
6624 (2022), 1092–1097.
[50] Zenan Li, Yifan Wu, Zhaoyu Li, Xinming Wei, Fan Yang, Xian Zhang, and Xiaox-
ing Ma. 2024. Autoformalize mathematical statements by symbolic equivalence
and semantic consistency. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
37 (2024), 53598–53625.
[51] Yong Lin, Shange Tang, Bohan Lyu, Ziran Yang, Jui-Hui Chung, Haoyu Zhao, Lai
Jiang, Yihan Geng, Jiawei Ge, Jingruo Sun, et al. 2025. Goedel-prover-v2: Scaling
formal theorem proving with scaffolded data synthesis and self-correction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.03613 (2025).
[52] Chengwu Liu, Ye Yuan, Yichun Yin, Yan Xu, Xin Xu, Zaoyu Chen, Yasheng Wang,
Lifeng Shang, Qun Liu, and Ming Zhang. 2025. Safe: Enhancing Mathematical
Reasoning in Large Language Models via Retrospective Step-aware Formal
Verification. arXiv:2506.04592 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04592
[53] Michael Xieyang Liu, Advait Sarkar, Carina Negreanu, Benjamin Zorn, Jack
Williams, Neil Toronto, and Andrew D. Gordon. 2023. “What It Wants Me To
Say”: Bridging the Abstraction Gap Between End-User Programmers and Code-
Generating Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–31. doi:10.1145/3544548.3580817
[54] Naiming Liu, Shashank Sonkar, Zichao Wang, Simon Woodhead, and Richard G
Baraniuk. 2023. Novice learner and expert tutor: Evaluating math reason-
ing abilities of large language models with misconceptions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.02439 (2023).
[55] Qi Liu, Xinhao Zheng, Xudong Lu, Qinxiang Cao, and Junchi Yan. 2025. Re-
thinking and Improving Autoformalization: Towards a Faithful Metric and a De-
pendency Retrieval-based Approach. In The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=hUb2At2DsQ
[56] Xiaoyang Liu, Kangjie Bao, Jiashuo Zhang, Yunqi Liu, Yu Chen, Yuntian Liu,
Yang Jiao, and Tao Luo. 2025. Atlas: Autoformalizing theorems through lifting,
augmentation, and synthesis of data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05567 (2025).
[57] Jianqiao Lu, Yingjia Wan, Yinya Huang, Jing Xiong, Zhengying Liu, and Zhi-
jiang Guo. 2025. FormalAlign: Automated Alignment Evaluation for Auto-
formalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
arXiv:2410.10135
[58] Jianqiao Lu, Yingjia Wan, Zhengying Liu, Yinya Huang, Jing Xiong, Chengwu
Liu, Jianhao Shen, Hui Jin, Jipeng Zhang, Haiming Wang, et al. 2024. Process-
driven autoformalization in lean 4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01940 (2024).
[59] Evelyn Lulis, Martha Evens, and Joel Michael. 2004. How Human Tutors Employ
Analogy to Facilitate Understanding. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Kenneth Forbus, Dedre Gentner, and
Terry Regier (Eds.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 861–866.
[60] Patrick Massot. 2024. Teaching mathematics using lean and controlled natural
language. In 15th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP
2024). Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 27–1.
[61] Hayden Moore and Asfahan Shah. 2025. Evaluating Autoformalization Robust-
ness via Semantically Similar Paraphrasing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12784
(2025).
[62] Hussein Mozannar, Gagan Bansal, Adam Fourney, and Eric Horvitz. 2024. Read-
ing Between the Lines: Modeling User Behavior and Costs in AI-Assisted Pro-
gramming. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3613904.3641936


Guo et al.
[63] Logan Murphy, Kaiyu Yang, Jialiang Sun, Zhaoyu Li, Anima Anandkumar,
and Xujie Si. 2024.
Autoformalizing euclidean geometry.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.17216 (2024).
[64] Brad Myers, Scott E Hudson, and Randy Pausch. 2000. Past, present, and
future of user interface software tools. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 7, 1 (2000), 3–28.
[65] Wojciech Nawrocki, Edward W Ayers, and Gabriel Ebner. 2023. An extensible
user interface for Lean 4. In 14th International Conference on Interactive Theorem
Proving (ITP 2023). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
[66] Tim Nelson, Ben Greenman, Siddhartha Prasad, Tristan Dyer, Ethan Bove,
Qianfan Chen, Charles Cutting, Thomas Del Vecchio, Sidney LeVine, Julianne
Rudner, et al. 2024. Forge: A tool and language for teaching formal methods.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 8, OOPSLA1 (2024), 613–
641.
[67] Sydney Nguyen, Hannah McLean Babe, Yangtian Zi, Arjun Guha, Carolyn Jane
Anderson, and Molly Q. Feldman. 2024. How Beginning Programmers and
Code LLMs (Mis)read Each Other. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–26. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642706
[68] Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKinney, Dean Carignan, and Eric
Horvitz. 2023. Capabilities of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.13375 (2023).
[69] Don Norman. 2013. The design of everyday things: Revised and expanded edition.
Basic books.
[70] Gabrielle O’Brien. 2025. How scientists use large language models to program.
In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–16.
[71] OpenAI. 2026. On the Navier–Stokes Millennium Prize Problem. https://openai.
com/index/navier-stokes-solution/. Accessed September 11, 2026.
[72] Azim Ospanov, Zijin Feng, Jiacheng Sun, Haoli Bai, Xin Shen, and Farzan Farnia.
2025. HERMES: Towards Efficient and Verifiable Mathematical Reasoning in
LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18760 (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.18760
[73] Manooshree Patel, Rayna Bhattacharyya, Thomas Lu, Arnav Mehta, Niels Voss,
Narges Norouzi, and Gireeja Ranade. 2026. LeanTutor: Towards a Verified AI
Mathematical Proof Tutor. In Proceedings of the Fortieth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI ’26). AAAI Press, 40670–40678. https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/41514
[74] Lawrence C. Paulson. 1994. Isabelle: A Generic Theorem Prover. In Proceedings
of the 12th International Conference on Automated Deduction (CADE-12) (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 814), Alan Bundy (Ed.). Springer, 37–41.
[75] Lawrence C Paulson. 2023. Large-scale formal proof for the working mathemati-
cian—lessons learnt from the ALEXANDRIA Project. In International Conference
on Intelligent Computer Mathematics. Springer, 3–15.
[76] Auguste Poiroux, Gail Weiss, Viktor Kunčak, and Antoine Bosselut. 2025. Reli-
able evaluation and benchmarks for statement autoformalization. In Proceedings
of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
17958–17980.
[77] PramaanaLabs 2026. Pramaana Labs. https://www.pramaanalabs.ai/. Accessed:
2026-05-08.
[78] Leon Reicherts, Zelun Tony Zhang, Elisabeth Von Oswald, Yuanting Liu, Yvonne
Rogers, and Mariam Hassib. 2025. AI, help me think—but for myself: Assisting
people in complex decision-making by providing different kinds of cognitive
support. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. 1–19.
[79] Mitchel Resnick, Brad Myers, Kumiyo Nakakoji, Ben Shneiderman, Randy
Pausch, Ted Selker, and Mike Eisenberg. 2005. Design principles for tools to
support creative thinking. (2005).
[80] Jessica Shi, Cassia Torczon, Harrison Goldstein, Andrew Head, and Benjamin C
Pierce. 2025. Designing Proof Deautomation for Rocq. In Proceedings of the
15th PLATEAU Workshop on Programming Languages and Human-Computer
Interaction (PLATEAU’25). ACM.
[81] Jessica Shi, Cassia Torczon, Harrison Goldstein, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Andrew
Head. 2025. QED in Context: An Observation Study of Proof Assistant Users.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 9, OOPSLA1, Article 92
(April 2025), 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3720426
[82] Jessica Shi, Cassia Torczon, Harrison Goldstein, Benjamin C Pierce, and Andrew
Head. 2025. QED in context: An observation study of proof assistant users.
Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 9, OOPSLA1 (2025), 337–
363.
[83] Michael Shulman. 2024. Strange new universes: Proof assistants and synthetic
foundations. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 61, 2 (2024), 257–270.
[84] Wilfried Sieg. 1990. Proof theory. Carnegie Mellon University.
[85] Vikash Singh, Debargha Ganguly, Haotian Yu, Chengwei Zhou, Prerna Singh,
Brandon Lee, Vipin Chaudhary, and Gourav Datta. 2026. Toward Guarantees
for Clinical Reasoning in Vision Language Models via Formal Verification.
arXiv:2602.24111 [cs.CV] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.24111
[86] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won
Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al.
2023. Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620, 7972
(2023), 172–180.
[87] Peiyang Song, Kaiyu Yang, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Lean copilot: Large
language models as copilots for theorem proving in lean.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.12534 (2024).
[88] Sofia Eleni Spatharioti, David Rothschild, Daniel G Goldstein, and Jake M
Hofman. 2025. Effects of LLM-based search on decision making: Speed, accuracy,
and overreliance. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–15.
[89] Hari Subramonyam, Roy Pea, Christopher Pondoc, Maneesh Agrawala, and
Colleen Seifert. 2024. Bridging the gulf of envisioning: Cognitive challenges in
prompt based interactions with LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.
[90] Guillem Tarrach, Albert Q Jiang, Daniel Raggi, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik.
2024. More details, please: Improving autoformalization with more detailed
proofs. In AI for Math Workshop@ ICML 2024.
[91] Alfred Tarski. 1983. On the Concept of Logical Consequence. In Logic, Semantics,
Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938. Oxford University Press. Original
work published 1936.
[92] Athina Thoma and Paola Iannone. 2022. Learning about Proof with the Theorem
Prover LEAN: The Abundant Numbers Task. International Journal of Research
in Undergraduate Mathematics Education 8 (2022), 64–93. doi:10.1007/s40753-
021-00140-1
[93] Athina Thoma and Paola Iannone. 2022. Learning about proof with the theorem
prover lean: the abundant numbers task. International Journal of Research in
Undergraduate Mathematics Education 8, 1 (2022), 64–93.
[94] Kurt VanLehn. 2006. The behavior of tutoring systems. International journal of
artificial intelligence in education 16, 3 (2006), 227–265.
[95] VIDA-NYU. 2026. Lea: An Agent Backbone for Mathematician-Led Formaliza-
tion. https://vida-nyu.github.io/Lea/. Accessed: 2026-08-29.
[96] Karen D Wang, Eric Burkholder, Carl Wieman, Shima Salehi, and Nick Haber.
2024. Examining the potential and pitfalls of ChatGPT in science and engi-
neering problem-solving. In Frontiers in Education, Vol. 8. Frontiers Media SA,
1330486.
[97] Ruida Wang, Jipeng Zhang, Yizhen Jia, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Renjie Pi, and
Tong Zhang. 2024. Theoremllama: Transforming general-purpose llms into
lean4 experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03203 (2024).
[98] Yousef Wardat. 2023. ChatGPT: A revolutionary tool for teaching and learning
mathematics. Available at SSRN 5653030 (2023).
[99] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-
soning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing
systems 35 (2022), 24824–24837.
[100] Sean Welleck and Rahul Saha. 2023. LLMSTEP: LLM proofstep suggestions in
Lean. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18457 (2023).
[101] Jelle Wemmenhove, Thijs Beurskens, Sean McCarren, Jan Moraal, David Tuin,
and Jim Portegies. 2022. Waterproof: Educational Software for Learning How
to Write Mathematical Proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13513 (2022).
[102] Ke Weng, Lun Du, Sirui Li, Wangyue Lu, Haozhe Sun, Hengyu Liu, and
Tiancheng Zhang. 2025. Autoformalization in the era of large language models:
A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23486 (2025).
[103] Hasini Witharana, Yangdi Lyu, Subodha Charles, and Prabhat Mishra. 2022.
A survey on assertion-based hardware verification. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 54, 11s (2022), 1–33.
[104] Magdalena Wolska and Ivana Kruijff-Korbayová. 2004. Analysis of mixed
natural and symbolic input in mathematical dialogs. In Proceedings of the 42nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-04). 25–32.
[105] Yutong Wu, Di Huang, Ruosi Wan, Yue Peng, Shijie Shang, Chenrui Cao, Lei Qi,
Rui Zhang, Xishan Zhang, Zidong Du, et al. 2026. StepFun-Formalizer: Unlock-
ing the Autoformalization Potential of LLMs Through Knowledge-Reasoning
Fusion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 40.
33980–33988.
[106] Yuhuai Wu, Albert Qiaochu Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus Rabe, Charles Staats,
Mateja Jamnik, and Christian Szegedy. 2022. Autoformalization with large
language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022),
32353–32368.
[107] Huajian Xin, Daya Guo, Zhihong Shao, Zhizhou Ren, Qihao Zhu, Bo Liu, Chong
Ruan, Wenda Li, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. DeepSeek-Prover: Advancing The-
orem Proving in LLMs through Large-Scale Synthetic Data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.14333 (2024).
[108] Fangzhi Xu, Qika Lin, Jiawei Han, Tianzhe Zhao, Jun Liu, and Erik Cambria.
2025. Are large language models really good logical reasoners? a comprehensive
evaluation and beyond. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
37, 4 (2025), 1620–1634.
[109] Kaiyu Yang, Gabriel Poesia, Jingxuan He, Wenda Li, Kristin Lauter, Swarat
Chaudhuri, and Dawn Song. 2024. Formal Mathematical Reasoning: A New
Frontier in AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16075 (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.16075


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
[110] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shix-
ing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. LeanDojo:
Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 36.
[111] Huaiyuan Ying, Zijian Wu, Yihan Geng, Jiayu Wang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen.
2024. Lean workbook: A large-scale lean problem set formalized from natural
language math problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37
(2024), 105848–105863.
[112] J. Diego Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y. Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian
Yang. 2023. Why Johnny Can’t Prompt: How Non-AI Experts Try (and Fail)
to Design LLM Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. Article 437, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581388
[113] Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. 2021. Minif2f: a cross-
system benchmark for formal olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.00110 (2021).
[114] Yangtian Zi, Luisa Li, Arjun Guha, Carolyn Jane Anderson, and Molly Q. Feld-
man. 2025. “I Would Have Written My Code Differently”: Beginners Struggle
to Understand LLM-Generated Code. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Inter-
national Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1479–1488.
doi:10.1145/3696630.3731663


Guo et al.
A
Problem Statements
The following ten problems from EECS 127 were used in our evaluation. Each problem was attempted by 𝑛= 10 students.
(1) Q1
Show that the following inequality hold for any vector ®𝑥∈R𝑛:
1
√𝑛∥®𝑥∥2 ≤∥®𝑥∥∞
(2) Q2
Show that the following inequality hold for any vector ®𝑥∈R𝑛:
∥®𝑥∥∞≤∥®𝑥∥2
(3) Q3
Show that the following inequality hold for any vector ®𝑥∈R𝑛:
∥®𝑥∥2 ≤∥®𝑥∥1
(4) Q4
Show that the following inequality hold for any vector ®𝑥∈R𝑛:
∥®𝑥∥1 ≤√𝑛∥®𝑥∥2
(5) Q5
Let 𝐴∈𝑆𝑛(i.e., the set of 𝑛× 𝑛symmetric matrices) and (𝜆1, ®𝑣1), (𝜆2, ®𝑣2) 𝜆1 ≠𝜆2 be distinct eigenpairs of 𝐴where ®𝑣1 ≠0 and ®𝑣2 ≠0.
Show that ®𝑣1
⊤®𝑣2 = 0 i.e., eigenspaces corresponding to distinct eigenvalues are mutually orthogonal. Note: this proof is part of the
spectral theorem, so please do not use the spectral theorem in the proof.
(6) Q6
Let 𝑃be an 𝑚× 𝑛matrix. Show that the Frobenius norm satisfies the following property of a norm: i. ∥𝑃∥𝐹= 0 if and only if 𝑃= 0
(7) Q7
Let 𝑃be an 𝑚× 𝑛matrix. Show that the Frobenius norm satisfies the following property of a norm: ii. For all 𝑎∈R, we have
∥𝑎𝑃∥𝐹= |𝑎| ∥𝑃∥𝐹
(8) Q8
Let 𝑃and 𝑄be 𝑚×𝑛matrices. Show that the Frobenius norm satisfies the following property of a norm: iii. ∥𝑃+ 𝑄∥𝐹≤∥𝑃∥𝐹+ ∥𝑄∥𝐹
(9) Q9
Let 𝑃be an 𝑚× 𝑛matrix. Write ∥𝑃∥2
𝐹in terms of singular values 𝜎1, . . . , 𝜎𝑛.
HINT: The cyclic property of traces might be helpful: tr(𝑃𝑄𝑅) = tr(𝑅𝑃𝑄) = tr(𝑄𝑅𝑃).
(10) Q10
In this problem, we will analyze properties of positive semidefinite (PSD) matrices. A symmetric matrix 𝑀∈R𝑛×𝑛is a PSD matrix if
®𝑥⊤𝑀®𝑥≥0
for all ®𝑥∈R𝑛, and we denote that as 𝑀⪰0
or
𝑀∈S𝑛
+. Assume 𝐴∈R𝑛×𝑛is a symmetric matrix. Show that if 𝐴⪰0
then all diagonal entries of 𝐴are non-negative, 𝐴𝑖𝑖≥0.
(11) Q11
Show that for any matrix 𝑄∈R𝑚×𝑛, if 𝐴= 𝑄⊤𝑄then 𝐴∈S𝑛
+. Note: If we take 𝑄= 𝑃∈S𝑛
+, we have 𝐴= 𝑃2 ∈S𝑛
+; this proves the
other direction of the above “if-and-only-if.”
(12) Q12
Let 𝐴∈R𝑛×𝑛be a symmetric matrix with eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs given by (𝜆0, ®𝑣0), . . . , (𝜆𝑛−1, ®𝑣𝑛−1), where 𝜆0 > · · · > 𝜆𝑛−1.
Consider the problem
𝑝∗= max
®𝑥∈R𝑛®𝑥⊤𝐴®𝑥
s.t.
∥®𝑥∥2
2 = 1,
®𝑥⊤®𝑣0 = 0.
Show that 𝑝∗= 𝜆1
HINT: First find an ®𝑥which is feasible and ®𝑥⊤𝐴®𝑥= 𝜆1. Then show that 𝑝∗≤𝜆1.
(13) Q13
Let 𝐴∈R𝑛×𝑛be a symmetric matrix with eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs given by (𝜆0, ®𝑣0), . . . , (𝜆𝑛−1, ®𝑣𝑛−1), where 𝜆0 > · · · > 𝜆𝑛−1.
Consider the problem
𝑝∗= max
®𝑥∈R𝑛®𝑥⊤𝐴®𝑥
s.t.
∥®𝑥∥2
2 = 1,
®𝑥⊤®𝑣0 = 0.
Firstly, show that 𝑝∗≥𝜆1 HINT: First find an ®𝑥which is feasible and ®𝑥⊤𝐴®𝑥= 𝜆1.
(14) Q14
Let 𝐴∈R𝑛×𝑛be a symmetric matrix with eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs given by (𝜆0, ®𝑣0), . . . , (𝜆𝑛−1, ®𝑣𝑛−1), where 𝜆0 > · · · > 𝜆𝑛−1.
Consider the problem
𝑝∗= max
®𝑥∈R𝑛®𝑥⊤𝐴®𝑥
s.t.
∥®𝑥∥2
2 = 1,
®𝑥⊤®𝑣0 = 0.
Then, show that 𝑝∗≤𝜆1
Noted that Q13 and Q14 are two sub parts of Q12, as in the classroom deployment we found the Q12 takes too long time to complete in
the study, therefore we cut them into 2. As we are not measuring the whole problem completeness, thus we did not discard the study data
for Q12.


LeanSide: A Formally Verified Co-Reasoning System for Natural-language Proofs
B
More interface screenshots
LeanSide could not verify step 3, 4. Check the compiler panel for details.
LeanSide Compiler
LeanSide could not verify step 4, 5, 6. Check the compiler panel for details.
LeanSide Compiler
(1) P20: A step-level error message helped P12 revise the proof strategy.
(2) P2: A step-level error message helped P2 correct a subtle error overlooked by 
expert evaluators.
LeanSide could not verify step 2, 3, 4, 5. Check the compiler panel for details.
LeanSide Compiler
LeanSide Compiler
(3) P12: P12 spent substantial time interpreting step-level error messages before 
revising.
LeanSide Compiler
LeanSide could not verify step 1, 2. Check the compiler panel for details.
(4) P4: Large-jump warning helped the student make progress.
LeanSide Compiler
(6) P18: Continuation hint helped the student make progress.
LeanSide Compiler
(5) P2: Continuation error message helped the student make progress.
LeanSide Compiler
(7) P16: Comparison between an unhelpful continuation error message and a useful 
continuation hint.
(8) P14: Suggestion message.
Figure 14: examples


Guo et al.
C
Participants’ demographic information
Table 2: Participant background and familiarity with Lean
Participant
Major
Year
Lean familiarity
P2
CS+math
1
Experienced with Lean introduction game
P3
Aerospace Engineering & EECS
4
No
P4
Chemistry
3
Tried another formal language
P6
CS
2
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P7
CS+math
2
Experienced with Lean introduction game
P8
CS
2
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P9
CS+math
2
No
P11
CS
2
No
P12
CS
1
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P13
CS + data science
4
No
P14
EECS
Master
No
P15
CS+datascience
1
No
P16
Data science
2
No
P18
CS & statistic
2
No
P19
Transportation Engineering
PhD
No
P20
Data science
2
No
P21
Data science
2
No
P22
CS+math
1
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P23
CS+math
4
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P24
CS+math
4
No
P25
Bio engineering
3
No
P26
CS + business
2
Knew Lean before, but never tried to write in Lean
P27
Business
2
No
Exam grade distribution:
Figure 15: This figure shows student’s grade distribution.
