AirLog: Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
Zihui Yun
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
ayucharon666@gmail.com
Jiaying Du
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
msz@uga.edu
Yue Yu
University College London
London, United Kingdom
ucfnyul@ucl.ac.uk
Zhewei Liu
University of Toronto Mississauga
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada
zwei.liu@utoronto.ca
Zhen Xiang
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
zxiangaa@uga.edu
Longfei Shangguan
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
longfei@pitt.edu
Zhenlin An∗
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
zhenlin.an@uga.edu
Abstract
This paper presents AirLog, a smartphone-based life jour-
naling system that automatically reconstructs users’ store
visits in shopping malls and summarizes them into human-
readable journals. Unlike conventional indoor localization
systems, AirLog avoids labor-intensive radio-map construc-
tion and dedicated wireless localization infrastructure and
algorithm calibrations. Instead, it repurposes two cues al-
ready available in commercial spaces: semantic information
exposed by ambient Wi-Fi SSIDs and indoor directory im-
ages. AirLog converts directory images into spatial maps and
fuses Wi-Fi semantic anchors with inertial dead reckoning to
recover store-level trajectories, which are then summarized
into journals by an LLM. Such store-level life logs can sup-
port applications such as personal memory recall, activity
reflection, and automated diary generation without requiring
users to manually record where they have been. We imple-
ment AirLog on commodity smartphones and evaluate it on
both a large-scale public dataset and a self-collected dataset.
The results demonstrate that AirLog substantially improves
store-level region recovery, semantic matching, trajectory
reconstruction, and journal quality over existing baselines. A
human evaluation further shows that the generated journals
are coherent and faithful to users’ visits.
1
Introduction
Automatically recording daily experiences has long been a
goal of mobile sensing and context-aware computing [17, 24].
In this paper, we focus on store-level indoor life logging: au-
tomatically reconstructing which stores or venues a user
visited in a shopping mall, in what order, and for how long,
∗Corresponding author.
and summarizing these visits into a human-readable jour-
nal. Such logs can support personal memory recall, visit
retrospection, and context-aware assistants. As illustrated
in Figure 1, instead of merely recording that a user spent
two hours at a mall, a useful log could report that the user
visited Macy’s, then Uniqlo, had lunch at the Cheesecake
Factory, and later stopped by the Apple Store, together with
the temporal order and dwell time of these visits. When users
cannot remember the details of a past visit, they can also
directly query the life log, e.g., “Where did I go for lunch
after visiting Uniqlo?”
At first glance, this task appears to be a straightforward ex-
tension of existing mobile lifelogging systems where coarse-
grained mobility context is often obtained directly from GPS
traces, digital maps, and nearby points of interest (POIs),
after which an LLM can interpret or summarize the resulting
context [45, 47, 62, 63, 69]. Indoors, however, the store-level
trajectory itself is not readily available, largely because GPS
is unreliable while conventional Wi-Fi localization typically
requires site-specific surveys, fingerprint databases, or dedi-
cated localization pipelines [4, 5, 25, 37, 68, 71]. Such require-
ments make store-level life logging difficult to scale across
large and frequently changing commercial spaces.
Our key observation is that commercial indoor environ-
ments already expose two useful spatial cues: (i): ambient
Wi-Fi SSIDs, which often reveal semantic information about
nearby stores [30, 52, 72]; and (ii): indoor directory images,
which expose region locations and readable labels. This leads
to our central question: Can these readily available but weak
semantic cues be combined with smartphone motion sensing to
recover store-level trajectories without relying on traditional
Wi-Fi radio map or localization infrastructures?
Answering this question introduces two challenges:
arXiv:2609.31864v1  [cs.NI]  25 Sep 2026


Yun et al.
Yesterday (Nov 12, 2024)
Ross Park Mall
What did I do after 
Macy's?
You went to The 
Cheesecake 
Factory for lunch 
after visiting 
Uniqlo.
After Macy's, you 
visited Uniqlo, then 
had lunch at The 
Cheesecake 
Factory.
After I went to 
Uniqlo yesterday, 
where did I go for 
lunch?
Wi-Fi
IMU
Floor-plan
A day in the mall (Passive 
sensing)
User carries a smartphone while
visiting stores in a shopping mall.
Automatically generated
life journal
Airlog  reconstructs store-level visits
and summarizes them into a journal.
Querying the life log
Users can ask retrospective 
questions about their past 
visits.
Entrance
Macy's
Browsed clothing 
and accessories.
Uniqlo
Looked at jackets 
and tried.
Apple Store
Explored products 
and left the mall.
10:02 - 
10:20 
(18 min)
10:24~ 
10:48
(24 min)
11:15~ 
11:58
(43 min)
12:05~ 
12:25 
(20 min)
Cheesecake 
Factory
Had lunch.
——— More examples ———
10:02 AM
10:24 AM
11:15 AM
12:05 PM
Total time in mall: ~2 h 23 min
Visited 4 stores
Figure 1: AirLog turns passive smartphone sensing into a
store-level indoor life log. (A) While the user visits a shopping
mall, the smartphone passively collects Wi-Fi scans and inertial
measurements, and a publicly available floor-plan image is used
as spatial context. (B) AirLog reconstructs the store-level trajec-
tory—what stores were visited, in what order, and for how long—and
summarizes it into a human-readable journal. (C) The life log is
queryable: users can ask retrospective questions, such as where
they went for lunch after visiting a specific store.
(1) public indoor maps are rarely available as machine-readable
region layers. While outdoor map services provide struc-
tured roads, venue boundaries, and POIs, indoor floor-
level information often exists only as directory images
rather than labeled region geometry that downstream
modules can query [21, 22, 38, 39]. Direct reasoning
over these images is unreliable because current vision-
language models (VLMs) still struggle with dense map
text and fine-grained spatial relationships [61].
(2) Ambient Wi-Fi provides semantic but inherently ambigu-
ous location evidence. An SSID may reveal that a partic-
ular store is nearby, but it does not uniquely determine
whether the user is inside that store, walking past it, or
located in an adjacent venue. RSSI further varies with
multipath, crowd blockage, device orientation, and het-
erogeneous AP placement. Thus, Wi-Fi should be treated
as a probabilistic semantic anchor rather than a direct
location estimate.
In this paper, we propose AirLog, a smartphone-based
system for store-level indoor life journaling. As shown in
Fig. 3, given passive smartphone Wi-Fi scans, inertial motion
recordings, and a crowd-accessible floor-plan image, AirLog
infers which stores a user likely visited, in what order, and
for how long, and then summarizes these visits into a life
journal. Rather than asking an LLM to infer the entire jour-
nal from raw sensor traces and a floor-plan image, AirLog
decomposes the task into three structured tasks.
• First, the map layer converts a human-facing indoor direc-
tory image into a labeled region map. The parser serializes
AutoLife (Prior Work)
AirLog (Ours)
Wild Indoor Commercial Life
Context-level
Store-level Semantic Trajectory
LLM/ VLM Context Fusion
General Daily Life
Multi-Agent + Map Constraints
Location
Context
Wi-Fi
Context
Motion
Context
Wi-Fi
IMU
Map/POI
LLM/VLM 
Fusion
Life
Journal
Store A
(Visit)
Corridor
(Pass)
Store B
(Visit)
Waiting Area
(Wait)
Store C
(Visit)
Wi-Fi
Semantic
Agent
Motion
Agent
Map
Context
Agent
Review
Agent
Planning
Agent
Store-level Trajectory
GRANULARITY
SCOPE
TECHNICAL
DESIGN
Agentic System
GPS / GIS + Online Maps
Fine Grained Floor Plan Image
Figure 2: From general daily life logging to store-level in-
door life journaling. AutoLife captures coarse multimodal context,
while AirLog uses structured indoor maps and map-constrained
multi-agent reasoning to reconstruct store-level trajectories.
this map as a GeoJSON FeatureCollection1, allowing later
modules to query region geometry and labels instead of
reasoning over raw pixels. The parser itself does not emit
corridor polygons, walkable areas, or connectivity. A sepa-
rate deterministic map-preparation stage derives the corridor
mask and trajectory graph used by the fusion layer.
However, indoor directory images are designed for hu-
man viewing rather than machine parsing. VLMs can miss
dense labels or distort region boundaries, while generic seg-
mentation and traditional CV methods are brittle to text,
icons, reflections, and perspective distortion [8, 55]. AirLog
therefore uses a geometry-first map parser: GPT Image 2
canonicalizes the visual layout into a clean region mask, de-
terministic CV aligns and vectorizes the regions, and GPT-4o
labels one polygon-masked crop at a time before writing the
returned label set directly to the source GeoJSON feature.
• Second, the trajectory layer grounds Wi-Fi and motion ob-
servations onto the map to recover store visits. Wi-Fi provides
useful semantic hints: an SSID such as Uniqlo_Guest may
suggest a nearby Uniqlo. However, the SSID names can be
ambiguous, abbreviated, and do not reveal whether the user
actually entered the store, walked past it, or visited a neigh-
boring store.
AirLog therefore treats SSIDs as probabilistic semantic
anchors rather than direct location estimates. It filters and
aggregates Wi-Fi scans, derives pedestrian dead reckoning
(PDR) motion from inertial measurements, and jointly eval-
uates candidate store sequences against map connectivity,
walking distance, and motion continuity. The decoded se-
mantic trajectory is then reviewed against these tool outputs;
1GeoJSON is an industry-standard JSON-based format for encoding map
features and their geometry [7]. In AirLog, each parser-produced feature
represents one region using Polygon or MultiPolygon geometry and stores
its readable strings in properties.labels.


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
detected semantic or physical inconsistencies are fed back
into the loop to improve the final trajectory.
• Third, the journal layer converts the validated trajectory
and motion sensor data into a human-readable account of
the visit. A store trajectory alone does not distinguish, for
example, spending 25 minutes shopping inside a store from
briefly passing its entrance. AirLog therefore combines dwell
time, POI type, motion-derived activity cues, and trajectory
confidence to derive a sequence of supported behavior events.
An LLM then summarizes this validated sequence into a
journal, rather than generating entries directly from raw
Wi-Fi or sensor observations.
We evaluate AirLog with two main data sources: large-
scale Microsoft public indoor traces containing over 19.7k
labeled Wi-Fi scan samples [35], and a self-collected six-city
corpus containing 374,567 Wi-Fi observations over 603.0 ac-
tive hours. From the latter, we construct 185,140 candidate
SSID–POI pairs for semantic analysis. The public traces sup-
port quantitative semantic trajectory recovery, while the
self-collected data support SSID semantic validation and
end-to-end journal generation validation. We test AirLog’s
local deployment on edge devices, where sensing data can
be collected during the day and processed locally afterward.
On-device execution takes longer than cloud, but it preserves
privacy by keeping raw data and journals on the user’s de-
vice, while smaller models still achieve comparable accuracy.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We propose AirLog, a novel agentic platform for survey-
free, site services-free indoor life journaling in wild envi-
ronments using smartphone sensing and crowd-accessible
map artifacts.
• We design a geometry-first map parser that converts human-
facing indoor directory images into labeled region maps
serialized as GeoJSON, making region polygons and their
readable labels directly queryable by downstream mod-
ules.
• We introduce a grounded semantic trajectory and jour-
naling layer that treats ambient Wi-Fi SSIDs as semantic
landmarks, fuses them with PDR and floor-plan topol-
ogy through graph-constrained inference, and generates
third-person journals from validated visits rather than raw
sensor context.
2
Related Works
2.1
Life Journaling
Lifelogging systems transform daily observations into records
for behavior understanding [6, 13, 17, 24]. Existing approaches
broadly use either vision-based or non-visual sensing. Wear-
able cameras and smart glasses capture rich egocentric con-
text [23, 28, 32, 58, 65], but incur high processing costs and
privacy concerns, while smartphone-based approaches ex-
ploit motion, wireless, audio, and location signals [31, 54,
56, 70]. Recent LLM-based systems further translate hetero-
geneous sensor data into open-vocabulary event descrip-
tions [2, 11, 29, 36, 45, 51, 62, 63], but largely rely on prompt-
level context and target outdoor mobility or coarse activities.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, AirLog instead grounds Wi-Fi and mo-
tion evidence on indoor map structure to recover store-level
semantic trajectories before journal generation.
2.2
Indoor Localization
Existing indoor localization methods [1, 12, 25, 48, 71] broadly
follow fingerprinting- or model-based paradigms. Finger-
printing methods require site-specific radio measurements
and machine learning [4, 5, 26, 68], while ranging- or AoA-
based methods depend on calibrated infrastructure and as-
sumptions specific to each deployment [60, 71], making both
costly to deploy across changing commercial environments.
Prior survey-free localization systems avoid manual site sur-
veys through crowdsourcing, PDR, map constraints, and
opportunistic landmarks, but still primarily target metric
coordinates and typically benefit from observations accumu-
lated across users or visits [50, 53, 57, 66]. AirLog instead
targets site-free semantic localization, inferring visited stores
from a single visit without site-specific fingerprints or accu-
mulated crowdsourced observations. Wi-Fi SSIDs provide
a promising survey-free semantic signal by encoding busi-
ness names and location-related tokens [30, 52, 72]; AirLog
revalidates this signal at scale and fuses it with PDR and
map topology to recover store-level trajectories rather than
isolated place labels.
2.3
Map Understanding with VLMs
Recent work uses VLMs for map reading, landmark reason-
ing, and navigation from floor-plan images [9, 33, 74], yet
current LVLMs struggle to jointly handle OCR, topology, and
route planning [61]. Meanwhile, public indoor-map services
rarely expose floor-level geometry and topology as queryable
layers [21, 22, 38, 39], and recovering queryable regions and
labels from human-facing maps remains challenging. AirLog
addresses these gaps by converting directory images into
labeled GeoJSON region maps for reasoning over explicit
polygons and labels. Existing map-parsing pipelines com-
bine OCR and classical segmentation [34, 55, 64], but remain
brittle on photographed directories with text, icons, legends,
reflections, and perspective distortion; AirLog instead canon-
icalizes region geometry with image generation, vectorizes
polygons using deterministic CV, and labels each region with
a per-region semantic subagent [16].
3
A Glimpse of AirLog
Imagine Bob visiting Rose Park Mall on a Saturday afternoon.
Before entering, he photographs the mall directory. He first
enters Uniqlo and browses, then walks past KFC, and later


Yun et al.
Map
Parsing
Trajectory
Construction
Journal
Generation
Floor Plan
(image)
In the late morning,
the user enters a
shopping mall…
Life journal
…
✓Dining (Eating)
POI: McDonald's     
Duration: 1,200s
✓Retail (Shopping)
…
Behavior Inference
Floor Plan
Generation
Semantic
Trajectory
Journal
Generation
GeoJson
Sensors
Readable
Map
Trajectory
Figure 3: AirLog overview. AirLog decomposes life logging into
three structured layers: (1) Labeled Region Map Construction: a
geometry-first parser converts an indoor directory image into a
labeled region map serialized as GeoJSON. (2) Trajectory Reconstruc-
tion: a trajectory agent grounds sensor data and Wi-Fi semantics
using downstream map constraints to infer store-level movement.
(3) Journal Generation: a journal agent summarizes the validated
trajectory into a third-person life journal.
spends about 25 minutes at Starbucks. Bob never checks in
or labels these visits; during the trip, his phone records only
passive Wi-Fi scans and IMU readings.
To reconstruct Bob’s path, AirLog must first convert this
directory photo into a labeled region map (§4). Although
readable to Bob, the raw image cannot directly serve as map
context for the trajectory agents, which need explicit store
geometry and POI labels. The resulting GeoJSON stores la-
beled region polygons for Uniqlo, KFC, and Starbucks so
later modules can combine the map with Bob’s Wi-Fi and
motion observations.
As Bob walks, his phone periodically observes SSIDs, in-
cluding Uniqlo_WiFi, KFC_FREE_WiFi, and Starbucks_WiFi.
However, these SSID observations are sometimes ambigu-
ous: seeing KFC_FREE_WiFi, for example, does not imply that
Bob entered KFC: he may simply be walking past it. AirLog
therefore treats Wi-Fi observations as probabilistic seman-
tic anchors, uses PDR to estimate how Bob moves between
observations, and jointly decodes them under the floor-plan
topology. Said differently, the Wi-Fi SSIDs indicate where
Bob may be, motion sensing indicates how Bob moved, and
the map constrains where Bob can move. These cues together
can help distinguish a brief pass near KFC from sustained
visits to Uniqlo and Starbucks (§5).
Finally, AirLog aggregates the reconstructed trajectory
into store-level visits using dwell time and motion cues, and
summarizes the validated sequence into a human-readable
journal, e.g., “In the afternoon, Bob visited Uniqlo, walked
through the dining area, and later spent about 25 minutes at
Starbucks.” (§6).
4
Constructing Labeled Region Maps from
Floor-Plan Images
We begin with the map-representation bottleneck in Bob’s
example. His floor-plan image contains the store-level in-
formation needed to reconstruct his visit—where Uniqlo,
KFC, Starbucks, and other POIs are located—but exposes
this information only as pixels. As shown in Figure 4(a)–
(b), a public map may identify the mall while providing no
queryable floor-level POI geometry, whereas the floor-plan
image visually encodes both store regions and their names.
For the trajectory reconstruction in the next section, how-
ever, AirLog needs more than an image: it needs an explicit
mapping from each POI label to its polygon so that down-
stream modules can query where stores are and reason about
their spatial relationships.
Challenge: recovering both region geometry and
readable labels. Turning a human-facing floor-plan im-
age into such a representation requires solving two coupled
problems. First, region geometry must be recovered from a
visually cluttered image. Store boundaries are mixed with
text, logos, icons, legends, decorative backgrounds, and weak
separators. Second, each recovered region must be associated
with the correct readable label set. Recognizing a store name
alone is insufficient: the system must know exactly which
region that name describes. A mistake in either geometry
or semantic association produces an incorrect map and can
subsequently mislead trajectory reconstruction.
Why conventional and direct approaches fall short.
The closest prior work on this problem is the shopping-mall-
plan parser of Su et al. [55]. Their pipeline first recognizes
a mall directory, applies threshold/edge preprocessing and
two-stage region growing to segment individual rooms, and
then uses OCR-recognized room identifiers to retrieve the
corresponding room names. This work establishes that ex-
plicitly coupling segmentation and recognition can recover
both geometry and semantics from structured shopping-mall
plans.
AirLog advances this line of work to more heterogeneous
human-facing floor-plan images, where text, logos, icons, leg-
ends, reflections, weak separators, and perspective distortion
make classical region growing and OCR-based matching brit-
tle. Rather than requiring an OCR-readable room identifier
that can be matched back to a directory, AirLog canonical-
izes the visual layout into explicit region geometry and then
assigns semantics directly to each recovered region with a
per-region semantic subagent.
Other direct alternatives expose complementary limita-
tions. Classical color-filling methods can merge neighboring
stores or retain non-POI structures when colors and back-
grounds vary, while edge detection can mistake text strokes


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
(a) Public Map
(b) Floor-plan regions (GT)
14
12
11
15
8-9
16
17
(c) SAM 3
14
(d) Color Filling
14
12
11
15
17
(e) Boundary Detection
12
11
15
16
14
(c) AirLog (Ours)
14
12
11
15
16
8-9
17
Background
wrongly recognized
Multiple
Stores Merged
Icons Wrong
Recognized
Sensitive
to noise
Stores
missing
Sensitive
to noise
Figure 4: From public maps to labeled region maps. (a) The
public map provides venue-level context but lacks floor-level region
geometry. (b) The floor-plan image contains the annotated regions
and readable labels. (c) SAM 3 absorbs background structures and
merges adjacent regions. (d) Color Filling is distracted by icons and
other visual structures. (e) Boundary Detection extracts text and
noise as candidate boundaries. (f) AirLog more closely recovers the
annotated region geometry and labels. This example is qualitative;
aggregate results appear in Table 1.
and decorations for region boundaries. Generic segmenta-
tion models such as SAM 3 [8] face a different mismatch:
they are designed primarily for object-like regions in natural
images rather than tenant-scale graphic regions, and can
therefore absorb background structures or merge adjacent
POIs. Semantic extraction alone does not solve the problem
either. Standalone OCR can miss small, stylized, rotated, or
low-resolution labels, and even a correctly recognized string
does not specify which region polygon it belongs to. A full-
map VLM faces a related coupling problem: it must recognize
every POI, predict each label’s position, and bind that posi-
tion to a region. A correctly recognized name can therefore
still be omitted, misplaced, or attached to the wrong polygon.
Figure 4 illustrates representative geometry failures. Appen-
dix A.4 pairs two exact-region OCR failures in Figure 18 and
places the coordinate-binding and geometry-to-semantics
mechanisms together in Figure 19, beside the claims that
they support.
These observations motivate a geometry-first, sequential
factorization. Instead of asking one model to jointly recover
region boundaries, recognize readable labels, predict label
coordinates, and bind labels to regions, AirLog first recov-
ers explicit region polygons and then uses each polygon to
define one constrained semantic task. As shown in Figure 5,
the geometry stages in (a)–(d) produce a geometry-only re-
gion map serialized as GeoJSON. Each recovered polygon is
then projected onto the original floor-plan image to produce
the polygon-masked crop in (e). The per-region semantic
subagent processes one crop at a time in (f), and its returned
label set is written directly to the same GeoJSON feature
(a)Input 
floor-plan crop
(A) Geometry pass
(b) Clean 
region mask
(c) CV based Mask 
Alignment
(d) CV based 
Region polygons
(B) Semantic pass
(g) Labeled
GeoJSON output
FeatureCollection
{
"properties": {
"labels": 
["Nordstrom"]
}
"geometry": 
{"type":"Polygon"
, ...
}}}
Apply each 
polygon 
as a mask
pandora
Phone Mania
LUNA
(f) Semantic 
subagent
VLM
(e) Polygon-masked 
crop
Figure 5: Geometry-first map-parsing pipeline. From (a) an
input floor-plan crop, AirLog generates (b) a clean region mask,
performs (c) mask alignment, and extracts (d) region polygons. Each
polygon produces (e) a polygon-masked crop for (f) the per-region
semantic subagent. The returned label set is written directly to its
source feature, producing (g) a labeled region map in GeoJSON.
in (g). The current pipeline therefore predicts no label co-
ordinate and requires no separate polygon–label binding
stage.
4.1
Geometry Pass: Recovering Regions
The geometry pass addresses the first question: where are
the regions? Directly extracting boundaries from Figure 5(a)
is unreliable because region geometry is entangled with text,
logos, icons, and background variation. AirLog therefore
first canonicalizes the map’s visual appearance before ex-
tracting precise geometry. Starting from the input crop in (a),
AirLog uses GPT Image 2 [43] to generate the clean region
mask in (b). The model redraws floor-plan regions as solid
regions over a uniform background while suppressing text,
icons, legends, and other visual clutter. The generated colors
carry no POI semantics; they only make individual spatial
regions explicit. This use of image generation is intentional:
the generative model handles heterogeneous appearance,
while deterministic processing remains responsible for spa-
tial precision.
The generated mask cannot be used directly because image
generation may introduce a small global translation or scale
change relative to the source floor-plan image. AirLog there-
fore aligns structural gradients between the generated mask
and source image under a restricted transformation consist-
ing of uniform scaling and horizontal and vertical transla-
tion, producing (c). Rotation and non-rigid deformation are
excluded, and the system falls back to the identity trans-
formation when reliable alignment cannot be established.
Deterministic CV then separates the uniform background
from foreground blocks, extracts 4-connected components,
traces exterior contours and holes, and converts them into
valid Polygon or MultiPolygon features. Candidates with
insufficient support in the original image are removed. The
output in (d) is a geometry-only map that explicitly repre-
sents the floor-plan regions but does not yet label them.


Yun et al.
4.2
Per-Region Semantic Subagent
Once the region polygons are fixed, AirLog uses them to
constrain semantic labeling. Here, per-region describes the
invocation unit: the subagent processes one recovered region
at a time, while the region polygon is used only to construct
its input crop. For each polygon, the system rasterizes its
exact geometry over the original floor-plan image, retains
source pixels inside the polygon, suppresses pixels outside
the polygon and inside any holes, and crops the result to the
polygon’s bounding box. This produces one polygon-masked
crop per GeoJSON feature while preserving the printed POI
name and excluding neighboring labels, legends, and deco-
rations.
The current system invokes this GPT-4o semantic sub-
agent once for each polygon-masked crop. Under the shared
visible-label policy, the subagent returns "labels":[...]
containing all readable strings in the target region. Because
each crop is generated from a known polygon, the returned
labels are written directly to that same feature. In contrast to
the earlier full-map baseline, the current method predicts no
label coordinates and requires no point-in-polygon, nearest-
neighbor, or learned cross-region binding stage.
4.3
Generate GeoJSON
After all recovered regions are labeled, AirLog exports a Geo-
JSON FeatureCollection. Each feature contains Polygon
or MultiPolygon geometry, along with a canonical label
field, properties.labels, containing the recognized strings.
The parser does not emit name, category, confidence, cor-
ridor polygons, walkable areas, traversability, or connectivity
fields. The result is a machine-queryable labeled region map.
For Bob’s example, Uniqlo, KFC, and Starbucks become la-
beled region polygons that later modules can query directly.
A separate deterministic map-preparation stage derives the
corridor mask and navigability graph used in the next sec-
tion; these downstream artifacts are not part of the parser’s
GeoJSON output.
5
Semantic Trajectory Reconstruction
Given the labeled region map obtained from §4, AirLog next
reconstructs the user’s store-level trajectory from Wi-Fi and
inertial sensing. Rather than asking an agent to directly pre-
dict locations, in AirLog we propose a multi-agent pipeline
(§5.1) that coordinates semantic Wi-Fi anchoring (§5.2), PDR-
based motion estimation (§5.3), and map-constrained infer-
ence (§5.4) to construct a trajectory that is both semantically
plausible and physically feasible.
Observation / Inference Result 
Feedback for
Re-planning 
Motion Context 
Map Constraints 
Location
Context 
Planning Agent
(Re-planning & Active Sensing)  
1. Wi-Fi Semantic Agent 
(Location Context) 
2. Motion Agent 
(Motion Context) 
3. Map Context Agent 
(Spatial Constraints) 
4. Context Fusion & Review Agent 
(Review, Reasoning & Fusion) 
Wi-Fi
Scans 
LLM 
Reasoning   
Semantic 
Location 
Context 
IMU
Data 
Motion 
Estimation 
Motion
Context 
GeoJSON 
Map
Navigability 
Graph
Review &
Understand
Viterbi 
Inference Tool 
Trajectory 
Estimate 
Set Next 
Goal / Path 
Collect Data 
Supporting 
Data / Tools 
POI / Store 
Database 
Venue 
Information
Time & 
Calendar
Figure 6: Trajectory Reconstruction in AirLog. The framework
organizes three complementary contexts for indoor trajectory re-
covery: Wi-Fi Semantic Agent derives semantic location context,
Motion Agent derives motion context, and Map Context Agent
derives GeoJSON map constraints. The Context Fusion & Review
Agent integrates these inputs and invokes structured inference to
recover a geometrically consistent, store-level trajectory.
5.1
Agent-Orchestrated Trajectory
Reconstruction
Figure 6 illustrates the agent-orchestrated context-fusion
pipeline. Before processing each episode, a Planning Agent
selects and schedules the required modules in a ReAct-style
loop [67], revising the plan when evidence is missing or con-
flicting. AirLog organizes the resulting evidence into three
complementary context streams: Wi-Fi semantic context for
location candidates, motion context for relative displacement
and heading changes, and map context for physically admis-
sible transitions. A structured fusion decoder combines these
contexts to recover a globally consistent trajectory, while a
review stage detects failures and triggers targeted replanning
when necessary.
5.2
Wi-Fi Semantic Agent
Validating SSID semantics in the wild. Prior work has
shown that Wi-Fi SSIDs can encode location and service
information [52]. We re-evaluate their usefulness in cur-
rent commercial environments using Wi-Fi observations col-
lected across six major cities (Table 6). Associating business-
class SSIDs with nearby OpenStreetMap POIs yields 185,140
candidate SSID–POI pairs. As summarized in Table 7, SSID
semantics remain observable at scale, but lexical matching
alone is too sparse and noisy to serve as a direct signal (repre-
sentative failure cases in Table 8). We therefore treat SSIDs as
weak semantic evidence and jointly reason over SSID strings,
RSSI rank, POI names, and map context. We further verify
that SSID distributions are venue- and floor-specific using
cross-session observations from a public benchmark [35],
spanning over 5.5 hours of data across 2 venues and 14 floors.
Simple SSID-set Jaccard matching achieves 87.88% accuracy
in identifying the correct site–floor pair, suggesting that


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
SSIDs provide a useful cue for automatic floor identification
without site-specific surveys.
5.2.1
SSID Semantic-noise filtering. Although SSID strings
provide useful place-level cues, raw Wi-Fi scans contain
substantial semantic noise that can mislead the anchoring
agent and inflate the LLM context. We make two observations
from our traces.
• Generic infrastructure SSIDs (e.g., T-mobile, China-mobile)
are prevalent but they provide less location information.
Many visible SSIDs correspond to carrier hotspots, venue-
wide guest networks, or router-default names. These net-
works provide little store-specific evidence and would
increase LLM input length, so we remove them with a
keyword blocklist.
• The strongest RSSI is not necessarily the nearest or most
useful POI cue. Indoor RSSI is unstable under multipath
propagation, wall attenuation, crowd blockage, AP place-
ment, and transmit-power variation [25, 71].
Therefore, AirLog does not assign location using the strongest
SSID alone. After filtering, we aggregate scans into sliding
windows, represent each SSID by its maximum RSSI within
the window, and pass the top-ranked SSID-RSSI pairs to the
LLM as soft semantic evidence. This allows the model to
reason over multiple possible store cues instead of relying
on a single nearest-signal rule. Empty windows are dropped,
and gaps longer than 600 s are flagged to avoid incorrect PDR
integration across disconnected sessions.
5.2.2
LLM-based semantic anchoring. After semantic-noise
filtering, each Wi-Fi window is represented by a compact
set of top-ranked SSID–RSSI pairs. AirLog then converts
this evidence into store-level semantic anchors. We formu-
late SSID-to-POI grounding as a language understanding
task [30]: the model must interpret noisy SSID strings, abbre-
viations, guest-network names, and RSSI ranks in the con-
text of the venue’s POI list and floor-plan topology. For each
window, AirLog constructs a structured prompt containing
three inputs: the venue’s POI names, map-derived spatial
descriptions, and the filtered top-𝑁SSID–RSSI pairs. The
prompt instructs the model to treat RSSI as relative proximity
evidence rather than a deterministic distance measurement;
the full prompt is shown in Appendix D.2.
To provide spatial grounding, we augment each POI with
a natural-language descriptor derived from the navigability
graph. The descriptor summarizes the POI’s relative position
and nearby stores, e.g., “Uniqlo is north of KFC and adjacent
to the main corridor entrance,” as illustrated in Figure 7.
These relational cues help the model disambiguate SSIDs that
are lexically similar or spatially overlapping, and prevent it
from treating all name matches as equally plausible. Rather
than forcing a single location decision, the model outputs all
Filtered Wi-Fi Window
System Role: You are a precise positioning assistant. 
Output ONLY valid JSON.
SYSTEM TASK: Identify ALL possible store locations 
for each timestamp...
MAP NODES: [Uniqlo, KFC, Zara, Starbucks, ...]
INSTRUCTIONS:
1. List ALL SSIDs that match the Map Nodes.
2. Do NOT limit to one store per timestamp.
Prompt
--- WIFI WINDOW (T=25.0s) ---
1 KFC_FREE_WiFi    : -48 dBm
2 Uniqlo_Store     : -54 dBm
3 MALL_FREE_WIFI   : -65 dBm
4 TP-Link_AP_98    : -78 dBm
5 ChinaNet_Auto    : -82 dBm
*... (5 more signals omitted)*
Window size: 
Δw=1s
LLM
{
  "results": [
    {
      "time": 0.5,
      "locs": [
        {"name": "Uniqlo", 
         "conﬁdence": 0.9},
        {"name": "KFC", 
         "conﬁdence": 0.4}
      ]
    },
    ...
  ]
}
Structured JSON Output
Spatial Context Description:
Uniqlo: North of KFC, adjacent to the main corridor entrance.
Zara: Next to Starbucks, across from the information desk.
H&M: Between Starbucks and Sephora …
Map Nodes: 
[Uniqlo, KFC, Zara, Starbucks, H&M, ...] 
Spatial Context Description & POI Context
Figure 7: LLM-based semantic anchoring pipeline. Wi-Fi RSSI
observations, spatial context, and POI context are combined into
a structured prompt, producing multi-label POI hypotheses with
confidence scores.
plausible nearby stores with confidence scores between zero
and one.
The resulting predictions are post-processed into semantic
anchors. Each predicted POI name is matched to the corre-
sponding GeoJSON feature and mapped to its polygon cen-
troid or store region in the navigability graph. Generic out-
puts such as floor identifiers, restroom tokens, and corridor
labels are discarded. Each surviving tuple (𝑡,𝑛,𝑐), consisting
of timestamp 𝑡, store name 𝑛, and confidence 𝑐, becomes a
probabilistic claim that the user was near store 𝑛at time 𝑡.
These sparse anchors provide semantic location evidence,
which complements the continuous but drift-prone PDR es-
timate used next.
5.3
Motion Context via PDR
Wi-Fi semantic anchors provide place-level cues but are
sparse and intermittent, leaving gaps between valid obser-
vations. AirLog bridges these gaps with continuous relative
motion from the phone’s inertial sensors using a standard
PDR pipeline [25, 31, 59]: step detections and rotation-vector-
derived headings are integrated into relative displacement
and heading change between consecutive sensing windows.
Wi-Fi anchors provide semantic positions, while PDR pro-
vides continuous motion between them. The earliest high-
confidence anchor can initialize the PDR path when no sur-
veyed starting point is available. Residual heading errors are
corrected during fusion using well-separated anchors. PDR
remains a motion context rather than a store-level trajectory
because its errors accumulate over time [37].


Yun et al.
5.4
Context Fusion & Review Agent
Prior Wi-Fi IMU floor-plan fusion systems can learn dense
location histories by training fusion models over collected
traces [27]. AirLog targets a different setting: wild indoor
venues where no site-specific fingerprint survey or training
trajectory is available. We therefore use a semantic-priority
Viterbi decoder that performs explicit probabilistic optimiza-
tion over the GeoJSON-derived navigability graph G [15, 49],
as shown in Figure 8. The decoder combines three scores. Wi-
Fi semantic anchors provide the emission term: nodes near
a high-confidence candidate store receive higher likelihood.
PDR provides the transition term: candidate graph edges
are favored when their distance and heading agree with the
observed displacement and turn angle. The map provides the
hard topological constraint: Viterbi only considers adjacent
nodes in G, which restricts the search to physically walkable
routes. We summarize the decoded trajectory as
ˆ𝑆1:𝑇= arg max
𝑆1:𝑇∈G
∑︁
𝑡
𝛽𝐸𝑡(𝑆𝑡) + 𝛼𝐴𝑡(𝑆𝑡−1,𝑆𝑡)
+ 𝛾𝐷𝑡(𝑆𝑡−1,𝑆𝑡) + 𝐶𝑡(𝑆𝑡−1,𝑆𝑡)

,
(1)
where 𝐸𝑡is semantic consistency with Wi-Fi anchors, 𝐴𝑡
and 𝐷𝑡are IMU heading and distance consistency, and 𝐶𝑡
is an anchor-based heading-calibration bonus when con-
secutive high-confidence semantic anchors imply a reliable
direction. Concretely, for a candidate transition from node
𝑢to node 𝑣, with edge direction 𝜃(𝑢, 𝑣), edge length ℓ(𝑢, 𝑣),
IMU motion primitive (𝑑𝑡, Δ𝜙𝑡), and active semantic anchors
ˆ𝐿𝑡= {(𝑛𝑗,𝑐𝑗)}, these terms are
𝐸𝑡(𝑣) =
∑︁
(𝑛𝑗,𝑐𝑗)∈ˆ𝐿𝑡
𝑐𝑗
 
−
dist(𝑣, P𝑛𝑗)2
2𝜎2
!
,
(2)
𝐴𝑡(𝑢, 𝑣) = log max (cos(𝜃(𝑢, 𝑣) −Δ𝜙𝑡), 𝜖) ,
(3)
𝐷𝑡(𝑢, 𝑣) = −(𝑑𝑡−ℓ(𝑢, 𝑣))2 .
(4)
Here P𝑛𝑗denotes the polygon or centroid of the POI named
by anchor 𝑛𝑗, and 𝜎controls the spatial bandwidth of se-
mantic evidence. In short, Wi-Fi estimates where the user
is likely to be, IMU estimates how the user moved, and the
map defines where the user can move.
Review and Feedback Loop: This optimization produces
an initial trajectory estimate, which AirLog then evaluates
using diagnostic signals such as position jumps, stuck seg-
ments, and PDR-to-map scale drift. If these indicate a low-
quality decode, a deterministic grid search re-runs Viterbi
over preset (𝛼, 𝛽,𝛾, calib_weight) configurations and keeps
the lowest-variance result; if issues persist, the Planning
Agent inspects the flagged windows using read-only Wi-Fi,
anchor, spatial, and PDR context and selects one bounded cor-
rective action, such as re-running semantic anchoring with
adjusted parameters or known SSID mappings, reweighting
WiFi Semantic (Emission) 
How well each node 
matches semantic anchors 
IMU Motion (Transition)
Topological Map (Constraints) 
Only allow transitions along
walkable edges 
Viterbi ﬁnds the most likely path that best 
explains both WiFi semantics and IMU motion 
under map constraints 
Semantic-Priority Viterbi Fusion 
Most Likely Path 
How well movement
matches distance &
heading on map 
Figure 8: Semantic-priority Viterbi fusion. Wi-Fi semantic an-
chors score where the user is likely to be, PDR motion primitives
score how the user could move, and the GeoJSON graph restricts
the search to physically walkable transitions. The decoder first
estimates a globally consistent trajectory, which is then reviewed
by the multimodal feedback agent.
14:12-14:57
15:07-15:42
16:00-16:51
17:15-17:41
17:41-18:05
Behavior Inference 
Life journal
"A productive afternoon! After 
grabbing a latte at Starbucks, The 
user spent some time at Zara and 
then headed to Apple to check out 
the new gadgets..." 
Reconstructed Trajectory 
& Map Information
Motion Calibration
"browsing","passing",...
(low linearity, few steps)
Candidate Motion
POI: Food Court
Behavior: Browsing
Dwell Time: 3 min 
(18:30-18:33)
Motion Disambiguation 
LLM
PDR/
IMU 
signals
LLM
LLM
Figure 9: Workflow of Diary Generation. The reconstructed
trajectory is aggregated into store-level visits by a behavior infer-
ence module (A). A motion calibration module (B) then refines each
activity label using PDR geometry and location context. Finally, a
diary agent (C) synthesizes the calibrated behavior sequence into a
third-person Life Journal.
the fusion decoder within a fixed valid range, falling back
to substring-based Wi-Fi matching, patching a single behav-
ior label, or accepting the result. Only Wi-Fi anchoring and
fusion may be revisited, each within a small retry budget,
while map parsing and PDR are fixed; the investigation itself
is capped by a round limit and a wall-clock budget, after
which the best result found is used. The Planning Agent’s de-
cision calls use a low sampling temperature, so repeated runs
can select different parameter values within these bounded
ranges rather than always reaching an identical trajectory.
6
Journal Generation
Spatial fusion produces a corrected trajectory, but the re-
sult remains a localization sequence rather than a human-
readable account. As shown in Fig. 9, AirLog transforms
this sequence into a diary through three stages: behavior


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
inference (A), motion calibration (B), and journal generation
(C).
6.1
Behavior Inference
As shown in Fig. 9(A), behavior inference converts the
fused trajectory into store-level visits. For each POI, AirLog
merges consecutive contacts inside or near the store region,
producing an enter time, exit time, dwell duration, semantic
confidence, and local motion summary. Consecutive con-
tacts are merged using a trajectory-adaptive temporal toler-
ance, allowing segmentation to adapt to different sampling
rates. Short contacts are treated as passing behavior, whereas
longer dwell periods form candidate visits. Structural POIs
such as corridors, elevators, and restrooms are excluded re-
gardless of dwell time.
For each candidate visit, the inference agent uses the
store name and category, dwell duration, neighboring POIs,
and an IMU-derived activity cue to infer the most likely
behavior. The motion cue can come from either a conven-
tional smartphone activity recognizer or a zero-shot activity
model [29, 31, 54]. The output is a compact behavior se-
quence containing the store, time interval, dwell duration,
inferred action, and confidence.
6.2
Journal Generation
Motion Calibration. As illustrated in Fig. 9(B), motion cali-
bration refines candidate activity labels using PDR-derived
motion features and location context. Step count, displace-
ment, path linearity, and mean speed first produce a candi-
date label from stationary, walking, browsing, transit, which
an LLM then disambiguates using the store category, dwell
time, and neighboring POIs. Before narration, an evidence-
filtering step removes unreliable WiFi anchors. Specifically,
a POI’s WiFi evidence is discarded when its active window
exceeds a predefined fraction of the visit while scan den-
sity remains low, indicating repeated background detections
rather than a concentrated visit. This rule overrides even
high-confidence WiFi anchors.
Journal Generation. As shown in Fig. 9(C), journal gener-
ation transforms the validated visits and calibrated actions
into a third-person Life Journal. The diary agent first con-
structs a structured outline containing the chronological
flow, dominant activity, inferred purpose, and salient visit
characteristics, and then rewrites the outline as a fluent nar-
rative. This two-stage process keeps the journal grounded in
validated behaviors while allowing natural transitions and
varied phrasing.
7
Implementation
Prototype. AirLog is implemented as a Python prototype.
A preprocessing module normalizes timestamps, converts
Table 1: Map-parsing results on the complete benchmark.
Higher is better. The two AirLog rows share identical region ge-
ometry and differ only in semantic-labeling configuration.
Method
Area F1 ↑
Region
Purity ↑
Matched
Label F1 ↑
Color Filling
0.277
0.510
0.523
Su et al.-style Boundary Detection
0.144
0.468
0.506
SAM 3
0.037
0.306
0.155
AirLog w/o semantic subagent
0.705
0.767
0.734
AirLog w/ semantic subagent
0.705
0.767
0.814
raw Wi-Fi records into SSID–RSSI snapshots, resamples IMU
streams for PDR, and serializes each session into a struc-
tured JSON file. The JSON representation contains Wi-Fi
windows, PDR motion primitives, and map context includ-
ing POI names, polygon centroids, and graph-based spatial
descriptors. To facilitate reproducibility, we will publicly re-
lease the implementation and experimental configurations
upon publication.
Model backends. We evaluate AirLog with both closed-
source and open-weight LLMs. GPT-4o is the default back-
bone, while GPT-5.4, Claude Sonnet 4.6, gpt-oss-120b, Gemma
4, Qwen 3, and DeepSeek-R1 are used for cross-model eval-
uation [3, 40, 41, 44]. The map-semantic comparison addi-
tionally uses GPT-5.5 [42]. Across backbones, preprocessing,
graph construction, Viterbi parameters, prompts, and post-
processing remain fixed.
Prompting and tools. AirLog uses a lightweight ReAct-
style agent loop [67], with LLMs handling semantic reason-
ing and deterministic Python modules performing validation
and spatially constrained trajectory fusion. Agent outputs
follow structured JSON schemas for semantic anchoring,
behavior inference, and diary generation.
Public dataset. We use the sample data from Indoor Loca-
tion Competition 2.0 [35], which provides smartphone sensor
traces, Wi-Fi scans, floor-plan images, and GeoJSON maps
from two large shopping malls in Hangzhou. Site 1 covers five
floors with 642 traces totaling 563.8 minutes, while Site 2
covers nine floors with 429 traces totaling 290.8 minutes.
Overall, the dataset contains 1,071 traces, 19,712 Wi-Fi scans,
and 8,704 surveyor-labeled waypoints. Each trace provides
time-synchronized sensor streams and surveyed waypoints
with absolute coordinates, enabling quantitative evaluation
of zero-shot trajectory reconstruction in multi-floor indoor
environments.
Self-collected dataset. We collect smartphone traces us-
ing Sensor Logger and export the recorded data for offline
processing [10]. A total of 603.0 hour data was collected
(Table 6). For each experiment, a volunteer starts record-
ing before entering the venue and carries the phone natu-
rally while performing ordinary activities. Wi-Fi scans are
recorded at the application default interval 10 s, and IMU


Yun et al.
streams are resampled to 50 Hz before PDR processing. Each
session is paired with a venue floor plan and a manual refer-
ence record of visited stores and dwell intervals. The floor
plan is captured by the volunteer as a photo of the mall di-
rectory before the session. AirLog uses readable floor-plan
images obtained from public venue websites, online map
directories, or crowdsourced photos when available. We use
the self-collected dataset primarily for Wi-Fi semantics anal-
ysis and journaling validation. For journaling evaluation, we
recruited 11 volunteers to annotate a subset of the traces in
Table 6 with reference journals, yielding a total of 33 h 37 min
of recorded time, of which 20 h 55 min correspond to indoor
activity.
8
Evaluation
8.1
Map Parsing Evaluation
Metrics. We report three complementary scores. (1) Area
F1 measures tolerant one-to-one region recovery, capturing
whether annotated regions are successfully recovered with-
out requiring exact boundaries. (2) Region Purity measures
the fraction of predicted area overlapping annotated fore-
ground, reflecting how well predictions avoid background
and other clutter. (3) Matched Label F1 evaluates semantic
label accuracy after geometry-based matching between pre-
dicted and ground-truth regions. Detailed matching rules,
averaging procedures, and label normalization are provided
in Appendix A.1.
Baselines. We compare three visual pipelines and two AirLog
semantic-labeling configurations. (1) Color Filling groups
connected regions by color and binds OCR labels by spa-
tial overlap. (2) Boundary Detection / Su et al. represents the
classical edge/region-growing approach in mall-plan pars-
ing [55], with OCR applied separately to candidate regions;
because no official implementation is used, this is our imple-
mentation of the procedure described in the paper. (3) SAM
3 [8] uses the fixed text-prompted configuration documented
in Appendix A.2, followed by full-crop OCR with the same
spatial binding strategy as Color Filling. We also report a
uniform threshold-0.5 SAM 3 sensitivity rerun in the appen-
dix. Since these methods differ in both region extraction and
label binding, Table 1 presents an end-to-end pipeline com-
parison rather than a controlled comparison under a shared
semantic-labeling module.
The two AirLog configurations use identical frozen pre-
dicted polygons and the same visible-label policy. Full-map
uses GPT-5.5 to jointly predict labels and coordinates for
the entire map before binding them to polygons, whereas
the current configuration invokes GPT-4o on each polygon-
masked crop and writes the returned label list directly to the
corresponding GeoJSON feature.
Table 2: Semantic labeling comparison. The GPT-4o per-region
run contains 1,920 completed semantic records from 1,927 applica-
tion attempts; all seven extra attempts were recovered by retries
and no record was excluded.
Model
Input
Calls Tokens (I/O) Time (s) Label F1
GPT-5.5 Full map
24/24 127.4k/137.0k
1,984.0
0.734
GPT-4o Region crop 1,920/1,927
524.2k/24.6k
1,815.9
0.814
Setting and map complexity. The complete benchmark
contains 24 floor-plan images spanning both public web-
published mall directories and in-the-wild photographs. Twenty
correspond to publicly discoverable malls with official web-
sites and public directory/floor-plan images; the remaining
four were photographed during our in-the-wild sensing col-
lection and may contain realistic perspective distortion, il-
lumination variation, and color shift. Region geometry was
manually maintained in QGIS against the exact pixel-aligned
crop. GPT-5.5 was used only as an auxiliary label-auditing
tool, and all final ground-truth labels were manually verified
against the source images. All method–image evaluations
completed under evaluator v8; the archived benchmark snap-
shot and runtime details are documented in Appendix A.2.
Figure 10 summarizes the density of OCR text relative to
geometry-valid annotated regions, characterizing visual clut-
ter rather than recognition accuracy.
Region recovery. AirLog substantially outperforms the vi-
sual baselines in both Area F1 and Region Purity, indicating
more complete region recovery and cleaner foreground lo-
calization. Area F1 increases from 0.277 for Color Filling to
0.705 for AirLog, while Region Purity increases from 0.510
to 0.767. These scores reflect tolerant region matching and
foreground coverage, respectively, rather than exact pixel
overlap. The conclusion is unchanged under standard IoU-
based metrics: AirLog obtains 0.590 Region F1@0.5 and 0.475
PQ@0.5, compared with 0.229 and 0.199 for Color Filling;
Appendix A.1 reports the full sanity check.
Semantic-labeling comparison. Table 2 compares the two
production semantic-labeling configurations under identical
frozen region geometry and the same visible-label policy.
Calls denotes completed semantic records/application at-
tempts, Tokens reports aggregate input/output tokens, and
Time is the summed model-response latency rather than
wall-clock batch time. Label F1 is the Matched Label F1 de-
fined above. Because the backend model and input scope
change together, this is an operational comparison rather
than a controlled ablation; we do not attribute the difference
independently to model choice or region cropping.
Semantic labeling. With region geometry and visible-label
policy fixed, the GPT-4o region-crop configuration reaches
0.814 Matched Label F1 (precision 0.789, recall 0.842), com-
pared with 0.734 for full-map GPT-5.5 (precision 0.728, recall


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
50
100
150
Number
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
Polygons
Labels
Figure 10: Floor-plan image
complexity.
(a) Ground truth
(b) AirLog (Ours)
(c) SenLLM
(d) AutoLife
Figure 11: Spatial distribution of subset hit/miss results across localization methods. Green dots
indicate waypoints where the GT location falls within the predicted subset; red dots indicate misses.
Rule
SenLLMAutoLife Ours
Different Methods
0
20
40
60
80
100
Subset Hit (%)
Subset Hit
Avg Hit Ratio
Rule
SenLLMAutoLife Ours
Different Methods
0
20
40
60
80
100
Recall (%)
Recall
Avg SeqSim
0
20
40
60
80
100
Avg Hit Ratio (%)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg SeqSim
(a) Subset Hit & Avg Hit Ratio
(b) Recall & Avg SeqSim
Figure 12: Trajectory reconstruction evaluation.
0.740). The 0.080 difference describes the two deployed con-
figurations only because model and input scope change to-
gether. The GPT-4o run completed all 1,920 semantic records;
seven transient failed attempts across six polygons were re-
covered within the retry budget, so no sample was excluded
from evaluation.
8.2
Store-Level Trajectory & Visit Recovery
Next, we evaluate how accurately AirLog reconstructs a
user’s trajectory and recovers the stores visited along the
trajectory.
Metrics. We evaluate recovery at two complementary lev-
els. For point-level trajectory recovery, (1) Subset Hit mea-
sures whether the predicted set covers all ground-truth POIs,
while (2) Avg Hit Ratio measures the fraction of ground-truth
POIs covered, using the five nearest POIs and an 8 m spatial
threshold with a ±5 s temporal window. These metrics are
evaluated on the public benchmark with surveyed ground
truth (§7). For store-level visit recovery, we further evaluate
self-collected diary cases (§7), where (3) Recall measures
recovered ground-truth visits and (4) SeqSim measures or-
dering consistency between predicted and ground-truth POI
sequences using normalized edit distance.
Baselines. We compare AirLog against three baselines. (1)
SenLLM, inspired by Penetrative AI [62], is a pure LLM rea-
soning baseline that receives the same formatted sensing
context and infers the POI sequence from motion and Wi-
Fi data. (2) AutoLife [63] is adapted to indoor settings by
using the provided floor-plan image as VLM location con-
text instead of a GPS-queried map. (3) Rule-based Trajectory
Reconstruction assigns each timestamp to the POI with the
strongest nearby Wi-Fi signal.
Results. Figure 12 shows that AirLog outperforms all base-
lines, improving Subset Hit and Avg Hit Ratio over AutoLife
by 24.8% and 24.6%, respectively. It also achieves 84.6% Recall
Figure 13: Comparison of generated journals. Underlined italic
denotes ground-truth POI names. Red denotes hallucinated or in-
correct content. More details in the Appendix C.
and 0.778 SeqSim, compared with 63.6% and 0.327 for Au-
toLife. The limited gain of AutoLife over SenLLM suggests
that floor-plan images alone are insufficient for reliable in-
door trajectory reasoning, whereas AirLog combines map
topology, Wi-Fi semantics, and motion continuity for more
accurate and physically consistent reconstruction; remaining
errors mainly occur in anchor-sparse corridors and dense
areas with overlapping Wi-Fi semantics (Fig. 11).
8.3
Journalling Recovery
Metrics. To evaluate the quality of generated journals, we
measure their similarity to reference journals using chrF [46]
and BERTScore [73]. We also report hallucination rate, which
is marked as hallucinated if the response contains content
that is not supported by evidence and is factually inconsistent
with the target context.
Settings: We recruit 11 volunteers to collect indoor shopping
traces. Each participant carries a smartphone during natural
shopping activities while the device records Wi-Fi scans and
IMU data. After each session, the participant writes a concise
reference journal describing the stores visited, dwell periods,
and main activities.
Results. Table 3 shows that AirLog achieves the best per-
formance across all metrics. It reduces the hallucination rate
from 0.667 for SenLLM and 0.636 for AutoLife to 0.000, while
improving chrF by 26.9% and 10.2%, and BERTScore F1 by
53.3% and 23.7%, respectively. Figure 13 further shows that
the baselines introduce unsupported stores, whereas AirLog


Yun et al.
Table 3: Diary generation quality evaluation. Hall. Rate indi-
cates the hallucination rate, chrF denotes the character F-score, and
P, R, and F1 refer to the precision, recall, and F1 score of BERTScore.
Method
Hall. Rate ↓
chrF ↑
BERTScore ↑
P
R
F1
SenLLM
0.667
0.331
0.263
0.403
0.330
AutoLife
0.636
0.381
0.363
0.458
0.409
AirLog
0.000
0.420
0.485
0.529
0.506
Table 4: Token usage and nominal estimated cost per ses-
sion. Estimates use GPT-4o-equivalent rates of $2.50/1M input and
$10.00/1M output tokens; they are not gateway invoices.
Module
Input
Output
Cost (USD)
Calls
Spatial description
22.3k
1.2k
6.8×10−2/hr
1 per floor
Wi-Fi semantic agent
118.7k
13.2k
4.3×10−1/hr
𝑁𝑤
Trajectory validation
62.8k
26.9k
4.3×10−1/hr
1 per session
Behavior inference
1.9k
0.8k
1.3×10−2/hr
1 per session
Journal generation
3.0k
1.3k
2.1×10−2/hr
1 per session
Total per session
208.7k
43.4k
9.6×10−1/hr
All modules
generates journals grounded in the recovered POI visit se-
quence.
8.4
Ablation Study
Figure 14 shows the contribution of each component to store-
level recovery. Removing the Wi-Fi Semantic Agent causes
the largest degradation, reducing Subset Hit and Avg Hit Ra-
tio from 71.2%/75.5% to 38.3%/42.3%, and Recall from 84.6%
to 36.0%. This highlights semantic Wi-Fi evidence as the
key source for identifying visited stores. Removing the Map
Agent or Context Fusion also substantially reduces point-
level recovery, with Avg Hit Ratio dropping to 56.0% and
55.2%, respectively. The Motion Agent mainly improves visit-
level consistency, while the Planning Agent has the small-
est effect on point-level metrics. Overall, the results show
that semantic anchoring provides the strongest contribution,
with map, motion, and fusion providing complementary con-
straints.
8.5
Cross-Model Evaluation
We evaluate AirLog with different LLM backbones to as-
sess its robustness to model choice. Figure 15 shows that
trajectory recovery remains relatively stable across back-
bones, while diary generation is more sensitive to model
choice. GPT-5.4 achieves the strongest overall trajectory per-
formance (73.9% Subset Hit, 77.3% Avg Hit Ratio, 83.3% Recall,
and 0.833 SeqSim), while Qwen3 (32B) achieves the highest
Recall (91.7%) but a substantially higher hallucination rate
(0.313). This gap highlights that high visit recall alone does
not guarantee reliable diary generation. Overall, AirLog re-
mains effective across both proprietary and open-weight
backbones, demonstrating robustness to the underlying LLM.
8.6
Human Evaluation Study
Setting. Following AutoLife [63], we conduct a user study
to evaluate generated journals along five dimensions: clarity,
conciseness, correctness, completeness, and relevance. Six
volunteers rated 11 generated diaries. All dimensions are
rated on a 1–4 scale, where 1 indicates that the generated
journal completely does not meet the criterion and 4 indi-
cates that it completely meets the criterion. Fleiss’ 𝜅is used
to measure inter-rater agreement. For self-evaluation, users
assessed the end-to-end system using their own collected
data.
Results. Figure 16 shows that the generated journals are
generally perceived as clear, relevant, and faithful to the col-
lected data. Evaluations from third-party raters are consistent
with the authors’ self-assessment, and raters show substan-
tial agreement in their judgments. Correctness emerges as a
particular strength, while conciseness remains an area for
improvement.
8.7
Token Cost
We report nominal API-equivalent cost by logging input
and output tokens for each LLM/VLM call and applying the
nominal GPT-4o rates stated in Table 4. Requests in our
experiments were routed through a custom third-party API-
compatible gateway, and no billing invoice or verified gate-
way pricing was available; the reported dollar values are
therefore estimates rather than actual paid cost. Processing
one hour of trace consumes 208.7k input tokens and 43.4k
output tokens, corresponding to $0.96 per hour. In other
words, the token cost is roughly $1 per hour of processed
trajectory. The cost is dominated by Wi-Fi semantic anchor-
ing and trajectory validation, while behavior inference and
journal generation add only a small fraction of the total.
8.8
Mobile and Edge Deployment
As location information is privacy sensitive, we evaluate
the local deployment cost of AirLog in terms of sensing
overhead and on-device processing.
Sensing System Cost. During daytime collection, the phone
only records passive Wi-Fi scans, IMU samples, timestamps,
and optional venue context using Sensor Logger [10] on
commodity phones (Xiaomi Flipmix2, vivo S12, and iQoo12).
Across the tested phones, a 1-hour trace consumes 153 mAh
(3% battery) and produces 70 MB of local data on average.
These measurements indicate modest overhead for hour-
scale passive sensing.
Running on edge device. We run our agent with Gemma 4
12B [20] locally with LM Studio [14] on a Mac mini equipped
with an M4 chip and 24 GB memory. Processing a 1-hour
daytime trace takes roughly 75 min end-to-end, making the
local setup suitable for deferred trajectory analysis and di-
ary generation rather than interactive use. This runtime is


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
Subset Hit Avg. Hit
Recall
SeqSim
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Full Ours
w/o Wi-Fi Semantic
w/o Motion
w/o Map
w/o Context Fusion
w/o Planning
Figure 14: Ablation study.
Subset Hit
Avg. Hit
Recall
SeqSim
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DeepSeek-R1 (70B)
Gemma 4 (4B)
Qwen3 (32B)
GPT-OSS (120B)
Claude Sonnet 4.6
GPT 5.4
(a) Trajectory Reconstruction
Hall. Rate
chrF
BS-P
BS-R
BS-F1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
GPT-OSS (120B)
DeepSeek-R1 (70B)
GPT 5.4
Claude Sonnet 4.6
Qwen3 (32B)
Gemma (latest)
(b) Diary Generation
Figure 15: Cross-model robustness evaluation.
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Clarity
Conciseness
Correctness
Completeness
Relevance
Third-Party
Self-Eval
Fleiss' κ
Figure 16: User study results.
therefore suitable for deferred journal generation rather than
interactive use during the trip. The map can be parsed once
offline and reused across visits to the same venue, so map
construction is not included in the per-trace runtime. We
further note that AirLog can also be deployed on mobile de-
vices through the Google AI Edge Gallery framework [18, 19];
however, phone-side execution is expected to take longer
and is mainly an additional deployment option.
9
Conclusion
We have presented the design and implementation of AirLog,
an agentic mobile system that converts a floor plan intended
for human interpretation into a machine-readable spatial
structure to which ambient Wi-Fi can be anchored, making
store-level indoor logging possible without dedicated infras-
tructure. We believe this points to a broader direction: agents
that interpret the spatial artifacts already present in built
environments and ground everyday signals against them.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under award No. 2554332, No. 2337537, No. 2433914,
and No. 2302724.
References
[1] Abdulrahman Alarifi et al. 2016. Ultra wideband indoor positioning
technologies: Analysis and recent advances. Sensors (2016).
[2] Tuo An, Yunjiao Zhou, Han Zou, and Jianfei Yang. 2025. IoT-LLM: En-
hancing Real-World IoT Task Reasoning with Large Language Models.
arXiv:2410.02429 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02429
[3] Anthropic. 2026. Claude Sonnet 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/
claude/sonnet. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[4] Paramvir Bahl and Venkata N. Padmanabhan. 2000. RADAR: An in-
building RF-based user location and tracking system. IEEE INFOCOM
(2000).
[5] Nayan Sanjay Bhatia and Katia Obraczka. 2025. Transforming Decoder-
Only Transformers for Accurate WiFi-Telemetry Based Indoor Local-
ization. arXiv:2505.15835 [cs.NI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.15835
[6] Marc Bolaños, Mariella Dimiccoli, and Petia Radeva. 2016. Toward
Storytelling from Visual Lifelogging: An Overview. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM on International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval.
[7] Howard Butler, Martin Daly, Allan Doyle, Sean Gillies, Stefan Hagen,
and Tim Schaub. 2016. The GeoJSON Format. RFC 7946. Internet
Engineering Task Force. https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC7946
[8] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath,
Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala,
Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, Jie Lei, Tengyu Ma, Baishan Guo,
Arpit Kalla, Markus Marks, Joseph Greer, Meng Wang, Peize Sun,
Roman Rädle, Triantafyllos Afouras, Effrosyni Mavroudi, Katherine
Xu, Tsung-Han Wu, Yu Zhou, Liliane Momeni, Rishi Hazra, Shuan-
grui Ding, Sagar Vaze, Francois Porcher, Feng Li, Siyuan Li, Aish-
warya Kamath, Ho Kei Cheng, Piotr Dollár, Nikhila Ravi, Kate Saenko,
Pengchuan Zhang, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. 2025. SAM 3: Seg-
ment Anything with Concepts. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.
16719 arXiv:2511.16719 [cs.CV]
[9] Kehan Chen, Yan Huang, Dong An, Jiawei He, Yifei Su, Jing Liu, Ni-
anfeng Liu, and Liang Wang. 2026. FloorPlan-VLN: A New Paradigm
for Floor Plan Guided Vision-Language Navigation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.17437 (2026).
[10] Kelvin Choi. 2026.
Sensor Logger.
https://www.tszheichoi.com/
sensorlogger. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[11] Hongwei Cui, Yuyang Du, Qun Yang, Yulin Shao, and Soung Chang
Liew. 2025. LLMind: Orchestrating AI and IoT with LLM for Complex
Task Execution. IEEE Communications Magazine 63, 4 (2025), 214–220.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.002.2400106
[12] Decawave. 2017. Decawave UWB positioning system overview.
[13] Aiden R. Doherty et al. 2013. Passively recognising human activities
through lifelogging. Computers in Human Behavior 29, 4 (2013), S40–
S48.
[14] Element Labs, Inc. 2026. LM Studio: Local AI on your computer.
https://lmstudio.ai/. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
[15] G. David Forney. 1973. The Viterbi algorithm. Proc. IEEE (1973).
[16] Valentin Gabeur, Shangbang Long, Songyou Peng, Paul Voigtlaender,
Shuyang Sun, Yanan Bao, Karen Truong, Zhicheng Wang, Wenlei Zhou,
Jonathan T. Barron, Kyle Genova, Nithish Kannen, Sherry Ben, Yan-
dong Li, Mandy Guo, Suhas Yogin, Yiming Gu, Huizhong Chen, Oliver
Wang, Saining Xie, Howard Zhou, Kaiming He, Thomas Funkhouser,
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, and Radu Soricut. 2026. Image Generators are
Generalist Vision Learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.20329 (2026).
[17] Jim Gemmell, Gordon Bell, and Roger Lueder. 2006. MyLifeBits: Ful-
filling the Memex Vision. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia.
[18] Google AI Edge. 2026. AI Edge Gallery Agent Skills. https://github.
com/google-ai-edge/gallery/tree/main/skills. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
[19] Google AI Edge Team. 2026. Bring State-of-the-Art Agentic Skills to the
Edge with Gemma 4. https://developers.googleblog.com/bring-state-
of-the-art-agentic-skills-to-the-edge-with-gemma-4/.
Accessed:
2026-06-05.
[20] Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemma 4 model card. https://ai.google.dev/
gemma/docs/core/model_card_4. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
[21] Google Maps. n.d..
Indoor Maps – About.
Online documenta-
tion.
https://www.google.com/maps/about/partners/indoormaps/
Accessed: 2026-05-24.


Yun et al.
[22] Google Maps Help. n.d.. Use indoor maps to view floor plans. Online
support documentation. https://support.google.com/maps/answer/
2803784 Accessed: 2026-05-24.
[23] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Vincent Car-
tillier, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jackson Ham-
burger, Hao Jiang, Devansh Kukreja, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, Miguel
Martin, Tushar Nagarajan, Ilija Radosavovic, Santhosh Kumar Ra-
makrishnan, Fiona Ryan, Jayant Sharma, Michael Wray, Mengmeng
Xu, Eric Zhongcong Xu, Chen Zhao, Siddhant Bansal, Dhruv Batra,
Sean Crane, Tien Do, Morrie Doulaty, Akshay Erapalli, Christoph
Feichtenhofer, Adriano Fragomeni, Qichen Fu, Abrham Gebreselasie,
Cristina González, James Hillis, Xuhua Huang, Yifei Huang, Wenqi
Jia, Weslie Khoo, Jáchym Kolář, Satwik Kottur, Anurag Kumar, Fed-
erico Landini, Chao Li, Yanghao Li, Zhenqiang Li, Karttikeya Man-
galam, Raghava Modhugu, Jonathan Munro, Tullie Murrell, Takumi
Nishiyasu, Will Price, Paola Ruiz Puentes, Merey Ramazanova, Leda
Sari, Kiran Somasundaram, Audrey Southerland, Yusuke Sugano, Rui-
jie Tao, Minh Vo, Yuchen Wang, Xindi Wu, Takuma Yagi, Ziwei
Zhao, Yunyi Zhu, Pablo Arbeláez, David Crandall, Dima Damen, Gio-
vanni Maria Farinella, Christian Fuegen, Bernard Ghanem, Vamsi Kr-
ishna Ithapu, C. V. Jawahar, Hanbyul Joo, Kris Kitani, Haizhou Li,
Richard Newcombe, Aude Oliva, Hyun Soo Park, James M. Rehg,
Yoichi Sato, Jianbo Shi, Mike Zheng Shou, Antonio Torralba, Lorenzo
Torresani, Mingfei Yan, and Jitendra Malik. 2025. Ego4D: Around
the World in 3,600 Hours of Egocentric Video. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47, 11 (2025), 9468–9509.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3381075
[24] Cathal Gurrin, Alan F Smeaton, and Aiden R Doherty. 2014. Lifel-
ogging: Personal Big Data. Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval 8, 1 (2014), 1–125.
[25] Robert Harle. 2013. A Survey of Indoor Inertial Positioning Systems
for Pedestrians. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (2013).
[26] Suining He and S-H Gary Chan. 2016. Wi-Fi fingerprint-based indoor
positioning: Recent advances and comparisons. IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials (2016).
[27] Sachini Herath, Saghar Irandoust, Bowen Chen, Yiming Qian, Pyojin
Kim, and Yasutaka Furukawa. 2021. Fusion-DHL: WiFi, IMU, and Floor-
plan Fusion for Dense History of Locations in Indoor Environments. In
2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 5677–5683.
[28] Steve Hodges, Lyndsay Williams, Emma Berry, Shahram Izadi, James
Srinivasan, Alex Butler, Gavin Smyth, Narinder Kapur, and Ken Wood.
2006. SenseCam: A Retrospective Memory Aid. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp).
Springer, 177–193.
[29] Sijie Ji, Xinzhe Zheng, and Chenshu Wu. 2024. HARGPT: Are LLMs
Zero-Shot Human Activity Recognizers?. In 2024 IEEE International
Workshop on Foundation Models for Cyber-Physical Systems & Internet
of Things (FMSys). 38–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/FMSys62467.2024.
00011
[30] Martin Korelič, Octavian Machidon, and Veljko Pejović. 2025. SELLMA:
Semantic Location through On-Device LLMs and WiFi Sensing. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Edge Systems, Ana-
lytics and Networking (World Trade Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands)
(EdgeSys ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 7–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3721888.3722091
[31] Jennifer R Kwapisz, Gary M Weiss, and Samuel A Moore. 2011. Activity
Recognition using Cell Phone Accelerometers. In KDD.
[32] Yong Jae Lee et al. 2008. Wearable context-aware systems for lifelog-
ging: A survey. In ISWC.
[33] Jiaxin Li, Weiqi Huang, Zan Wang, Wei Liang, Huijun Di, and Feng
Liu. 2025. FloNa: Floor Plan Guided Embodied Visual Navigation. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39.
14610–14618.
[34] Chen Liu, Jiajun Wu, Pushmeet Kohli, and Yasutaka Furukawa. 2017.
Raster-to-Vector: Revisiting Floorplan Transformation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2195–
2203.
[35] Location Competition. 2020. Indoor Location Competition 2.0 Sam-
ple Data and Code. https://github.com/location-competition/indoor-
location-competition-20. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[36] Subigya Nepal, Arvind Pillai, Talie Massachi, Eunsol Soul Choi, et al.
2024. Contextual AI Journaling: Integrating LLM and Time Series
Behavioral Sensing Technology to Promote Self-Reflection and Well-
being using the MindScape App. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8.
[37] Zheng Ni et al. 2022. Experience: Indoor Localization in the Wild. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Emerging Network-
ing Experiments and Technologies (CoNEXT).
[38] Open Geospatial Consortium. 2021. Indoor Mapping Data Format
(IMDF) Community Standard, Version 1.0.0.
Technical Report 20-
094. Open Geospatial Consortium. https://docs.ogc.org/cs/20-094/
Reference/index.html Accessed: 2026-05-24.
[39] Open Geospatial Consortium. 2023. IndoorGML Standard – Indoor
Spatial and Navigation Data Standard. OGC standards page. https:
//www.ogc.org/standards/indoorgml/ Accessed: 2026-05-24.
[40] OpenAI. 2025.
Introducing gpt-oss.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-gpt-oss/. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[41] OpenAI. 2026. GPT-4o Model. https://platform.openai.com/docs/
models/gpt-4o. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[42] OpenAI. 2026. GPT-5.5 Model. https://developers.openai.com/api/
docs/models/gpt-5.5. Accessed: 2026-08-24.
[43] OpenAI. 2026. Introducing ChatGPT Images 2.0. https://openai.com/
index/introducing-chatgpt-images-2-0/. Accessed: 2026-06-05.
[44] OpenAI. 2026.
Introducing GPT-5.4.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-gpt-5-4/. Accessed: 2026-05-28.
[45] Xiaomin Ouyang and Mani Srivastava. 2024. LLMSense: Harnessing
LLMs for High-level Reasoning Over Spatiotemporal Sensor Traces.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19857 (2024).
[46] Maja Popović. 2015. chrF: character n-gram F-score for automatic MT
evaluation. In Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. 392–395.
[47] Kevin Post, Reo Kuchida, Mayowa Olapade, Zhigang Yin, Petteri
Nurmi, and Huber Flores. 2025. ContextLLM: Meaningful Context
Reasoning from Multi-Sensor and Multi-Device Data Using LLMs. In
Proceedings of the 26th International Workshop on Mobile Computing
Systems and Applications (HOTMOBILE ’25). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
13–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3708468.3711892
[48] Jiageng Qiao et al. 2024. Advancements in Indoor Precision Posi-
tioning: A Comprehensive Survey of UWB and Wi-Fi RTT. Network
(2024).
[49] Lawrence Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on hidden Markov models.
[50] Anshul Rai, Krishna Kant Chintalapudi, Venkata N. Padmanabhan,
and Rijurekha Sen. 2012. Zee: Zero-Effort Crowdsourcing for Indoor
Localization. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom ’12). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 293–304.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2348543.2348580
[51] Zhiwei Ren, Junbo Li, Minjia Zhang, Di Wang, Xiaoran Fan, and
Longfei Shangguan. 2025.
Toward Sensor-In-the-Loop LLM Agent:
Benchmarks and Implications. Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 254–267. https://doi.org/10.1145/3715014.
3722082


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
[52] Suranga Seneviratne, Fangzhou Jiang, Mathieu Cunche, and Aruna
Seneviratne. 2015. SSIDs in the wild: Extracting semantic informa-
tion from WiFi SSIDs. In 2015 IEEE 40th conference on local computer
networks (LCN). IEEE, 494–497.
[53] Guobin Shen, Zhuo Chen, Peichao Zhang, Thomas Moscibroda, and
Yongguang Zhang. 2013. Walkie-Markie: Indoor Pathway Mapping
Made Easy. In 10th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI ’13). USENIX Association, Lombard, IL,
USA, 85–98. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi13/technical-
sessions/presentation/shen
[54] Muhammad Shoaib et al. 2014. Fusion of Smartphone Motion Sensors
for Physical Activity Recognition. In Sensors.
[55] Ming Su, Wei Shi, Dangjun Zhao, Dongyang Cheng, and Junchao
Zhang. 2022. A High-Precision Method for Segmentation and Recog-
nition of Shopping Mall Plans. Sensors 22, 7 (2022), 2510.
https:
//doi.org/10.3390/s22072510
[56] Ke Sun, Chunyu Xia, Xinyu Zhang, Hao Chen, and Charlie Jianzhong
Zhang. 2024. Multimodal Daily-Life Logging in Free-living Environ-
ment Using Non-Visual Egocentric Sensors on a Smartphone. Proc.
ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 8, 1, Article 17 (March
2024), 32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643553
[57] He Wang, Souvik Sen, Ahmed Elgohary, Moustafa Farid, Moustafa
Youssef, and Romit Roy Choudhury. 2012. No Need to War-Drive: Un-
supervised Indoor Localization. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys ’12).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 197–210.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2307636.2307655
[58] Shihao Wang, Guo Chen, De-an Huang, Zhiqi Li, Minghan Li, Guilin
Liu, Jose M. Alvarez, Lei Zhang, and Zhiding Yu. 2025. VideoITG: Mul-
timodal Video Understanding with Instructed Temporal Grounding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13353 (2025).
[59] Harvey Weinberg. 2002. Using the ADXL202 in pedometer and per-
sonal navigation applications. In Analog Devices AN-602.
[60] Zhao Wenda, Goudar Abhishek, Qiao Xinyuan, and Angela P. Schoellig.
2024. UTIL: An Ultra-wideband Time-difference-of-arrival Indoor
Localization Dataset. The International Journal of Robotics Research
43, 10 (2024), 1443–1456.
[61] Shuo Xing, Shuangyu Xie, Zezhou Sun, Kaiyuan Chen, Yanjia Huang,
Yuping Wang, Jiachen Li, Dezhen Song, and Zhengzhong Tu. 2025.
Can Large Vision Language Models Read Maps Like a Human? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.14607 (2025).
[62] Huatao Xu, Liying Han, Qirui Yang, Mo Li, and Mani Srivastava. 2024.
Penetrative ai: Making llms comprehend the physical world. In Proceed-
ings of the 25th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems
and Applications. 1–7.
[63] Huatao Xu, Zilin Zeng, Panrong Tong, Mo Li, and Mani B. Srivastava.
2025. AutoLife: Automatic Life Journaling with Smartphones and
LLMs. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and
Ubiquitous Technologies 9, 4 (2025), 1–29.
https://doi.org/10.1145/
3770683
[64] Chen Yang, Zhenghao Tang, Yasutaka Furukawa, et al. 2019. FloorNet:
A Unified Framework for Floorplan Reconstruction from 3D Scans.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.04394 (2019).
[65] Jingkang Yang, Shuai Liu, Hongming Guo, Yuhao Dong, Xiamengwei
Zhang, Sicheng Zhang, Pengyun Wang, Zitang Zhou, Binzhu Xie,
Ziyue Wang, Bei Ouyang, Zhengyu Lin, Marco Cominelli, Zhongang
Cai, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Peiyuan Zhang, Fangzhou Hong, Joerg
Widmer, Francesco Gringoli, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. 2025. EgoLife:
Towards Egocentric Life Assistant. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 28885–28900. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52734.2025.02690
[66] Zheng Yang, Chenshu Wu, and Yunhao Liu. 2012. Locating in Fin-
gerprint Space: Wireless Indoor Localization with Little Human In-
tervention. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual International Confer-
ence on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom ’12). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 269–280.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2348543.2348578
[67] Shunyu Yao et al. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 (2023).
[68] Moustafa Youssef and Ashok Agrawala. 2005. The Horus WLAN
location determination system. In MobiSys.
[69] Xiaofan Yu, Lanxiang Hu, Benjamin Reichman, Dylan Chu, Rushil
Chandrupatla, Xiyuan Zhang, Larry Heck, and Tajana S. Rosing. 2025.
SensorChat: Answering Qualitative and Quantitative Questions during
Long-term Multimodal Sensor Interactions. Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 9, 3, Article
148 (2025), 35 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3749496
[70] Ozgur Yurur et al. 2014. Context-awareness for mobile sensing: A
survey and future directions. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
(2014).
[71] Faheem Zafari, Athanasios Gkelias, and Kin K. Leung. 2019. A survey
of indoor localization systems and technologies. IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials (2019).
[72] Haopeng Zhang, Yili Ren, Haohan Yuan, Jingzhe Zhang, and Yitong
Shen. 2025. Wi-Chat: Large Language Model Powered Wi-Fi Sensing.
arXiv:2502.12421 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12421
[73] Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and
Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT.
In International Conference on Learning Representations.
[74] Kaiwen Zhou, Kaizhi Zheng, Connor Pryor, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin,
Lise Getoor, and Xin Eric Wang. 2023. NavGPT: Explicit Reasoning in
Vision-and-Language Navigation with Large Language Models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.16986 (2023).


Yun et al.
A
Map Parsing Evaluation and Failure
Analysis
This appendix expands the map-parsing claims made in Sec-
tion 4 and the results reported in Section 8.1. The main text
gives the headline comparison; here we explain why the
three reported metrics are appropriate, how to interpret the
corresponding scores, and which qualitative cases support
the design choices and limitations discussed in the method.
A.1
Metric Design and Interpretation
Table 1 in the main text evaluates two questions: whether
AirLog recovers each floor-plan region as a usable polygon,
and whether the recovered polygon receives the correct read-
able labels. We therefore report two geometry metrics and
one semantic metric.
Area F1: did we recover the regions? For an annotated
region 𝑔and a predicted region 𝑝, we first compute the two
directed area coverages
𝑐𝑔(𝑔, 𝑝) = Area(𝑔∩𝑝)
Area(𝑔)
,
𝑐𝑝(𝑔, 𝑝) = Area(𝑔∩𝑝)
Area(𝑝)
.
(5)
A pair is eligible when
max(𝑐𝑔,𝑐𝑝) ≥0.5,
min(𝑐𝑔,𝑐𝑝) ≥0.05,
(6)
after which we form a label-independent one-to-one match-
ing. Let 𝑇𝑃𝐴be the matched pairs, 𝐹𝑃𝐴the unmatched pre-
dictions, and 𝐹𝑁𝐴the unmatched annotations. We compute
𝑃𝐴=
𝑇𝑃𝐴
𝑇𝑃𝐴+ 𝐹𝑃𝐴
,
𝑅𝐴=
𝑇𝑃𝐴
𝑇𝑃𝐴+ 𝐹𝑁𝐴
,
AreaF1 = 2𝑃𝐴𝑅𝐴
𝑃𝐴+ 𝑅𝐴
.
(7)
This tolerant criterion reflects the downstream require-
ment of AirLog: later modules need one queryable polygon
for each floor-plan region, while small boundary deviations
are less important than missing, splitting, or duplicating a
region. Thus, the increase from 0.277 to 0.705 in Table 1
indicates substantially more successful one-to-one region
recovery; it should not be interpreted as 70.5% pixel overlap.
For reproducibility, this paper-facing Area F1 corresponds
to the association_f1 field in evaluator v8.
Region Purity: did a polygon absorb unrelated content?
Let ΩGT be the union of all evaluator-valid annotated regions.
For each predicted polygon 𝑝, we compute
Purity(𝑝) = Area(𝑝∩ΩGT)
Area(𝑝)
.
(8)
Predictions receive equal weight within each image, and
image-level means are macro-averaged. Region Purity com-
plements Area F1 because a prediction may recover the in-
tended region while also absorbing corridor, neighboring-
store, icon, or background pixels. The increase from 0.510 to
0.767 in Table 1 therefore indicates cleaner region predictions
with less unrelated content.
Matched Label F1: are the labels correct once geometry
is fixed? Semantic evaluation first forms a separate label-
independent one-to-one geometry matching at IoU ≥0.5.
Label strings are canonicalized identically for all methods
and compared as sets. With pooled semantic true positives,
false positives, and false negatives denoted by 𝑇𝑃𝐿, 𝐹𝑃𝐿, and
𝐹𝑁𝐿, we report
𝑃𝐿=
𝑇𝑃𝐿
𝑇𝑃𝐿+ 𝐹𝑃𝐿
,
𝑅𝐿=
𝑇𝑃𝐿
𝑇𝑃𝐿+ 𝐹𝑁𝐿
,
LabelF1 = 2𝑃𝐿𝑅𝐿
𝑃𝐿+ 𝑅𝐿
.
(9)
Unmatched polygons are left to the geometry metrics, so
geometry failures are not counted again as semantic errors.
Under frozen geometry, the deployed GPT-4o region-crop
configuration obtains 0.814 Matched Label F1, compared
with 0.734 for the GPT-5.5 full-map configuration in Table 2.
Because the backend model and visual scope change together,
this comparison does not isolate the effect of region cropping
or model choice.
Standard-metric sanity check. Area F1 uses a task-motivated
tolerant matching rule. To verify that the geometry conclu-
sion does not depend on this rule, we additionally evalu-
ate the same frozen predictions using standard one-to-one
matching at IoU ≥0.5. Table 5 reports Region F1@0.5 and
PQ@0.5. The method ordering remains unchanged under
both metrics.
Table 5: Standard-metric sanity check on map geometry. Re-
gion F1@0.5 and PQ@0.5 use one-to-one matching at IoU ≥0.5
and are macro-averaged across the 24 maps.
Method
Region F1@0.5 ↑
PQ@0.5 ↑
Color Filling
0.229
0.199
Boundary Detection / Su et al.
0.095
0.075
SAM 3
0.020
0.016
AirLog
0.590
0.475
A.2
Benchmark and Comparison Protocol
The benchmark used by Section 8.1 contains 24 floor-plan
images with 1,488 geometry-valid annotated polygons and
1,400 label strings; 190 polygons contain multiple readable
labels. Twenty images correspond to publicly discoverable


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
malls with official websites and publicly available directory
or floor-plan images. The remaining four are mall-directory
photographs captured during the same in-the-wild sensing
collection used elsewhere in AirLog. These photographs may
contain perspective distortion, illumination variation, and
color shift that are less pronounced in web-published maps.
The benchmark therefore covers both web-published floor-
plan artifacts and photographed mall directories encountered
in the target deployment setting.
The multi-label cases motivate evaluating label sets rather
than forcing every region to contain a single store-name
string. Ground-truth polygon geometry was manually main-
tained in QGIS against the exact pixel-aligned source image.
GPT-5.5 was used only as an auxiliary tool for label audit-
ing; every final ground-truth label was manually reviewed
against the source floor-plan image.
All reported values use the same archived evaluator-v8
snapshot and prediction artifacts under OpenCV 4.10.0. Baseline-
specific settings were fixed globally and applied uniformly
across the 24 maps. We did not tune parameters separately
for individual maps or select settings against the benchmark
ground truth.
Baseline configurations. Color Filling uses gray-world
normalization, OKLab clustering with𝑘= 6, merge threshold
0.04, random seed 13, and a 30-pixel minimum connected-
component area. PaddleOCR (lang=ch) is applied to the full
map, and OCR results are bound to predicted regions by
maximum overlap with center fallback.
Boundary Detection / Su et al. is our implementation of
the edge/region-growing procedure described by Su et al.,
rather than an official author-code reproduction. It applies
the fixed threshold/edge pipeline at the original resolution,
retains regions of at least 30 pixels, runs OCR on regions of
at least 1,200 pixels among at most the 80 largest candidates,
and retries OCR once after a 90◦rotation when necessary.
For SAM 3, the configuration reported in Table 1 uses the
text prompts map region and enclosed spatial region,
longest-side preprocessing at 2,048 pixels, and a mask-binarization
threshold of 0.5. Separately, the wrapper’s omitted object-
query score threshold resolves to a detection-confidence
threshold of 0.0 rather than the processor default of 0.5. The
configuration uses up to 500 masks, no overlap NMS, and
exports each residual connected component as a polygon.
This permissive configuration produces 24,939 predicted
polygons for 1,482 annotated polygons, and 68.05% of the
predicted polygons have no evaluator-raster overlap with an-
notated foreground. This large amount of over-segmentation
explains the unusually low 0.037 Area F1 reported for SAM
3.
SAM 3 configuration sensitivity. To test whether the low
SAM 3 result is primarily an artifact of the permissive con-
figuration above, we reran all 24 maps using the same check-
point, text prompts, resize cap, and OCR pipeline, while
restoring the detection-confidence threshold to 0.5 and re-
taining one residual component per query. This more con-
servative configuration removes the large false-positive frag-
mentation, but produces predictions on only one of the 24
maps. With empty-prediction maps assigned zero, it obtains
Region F1@0.5 of 0.042 and PQ@0.5 of 0.033. Thus, the sen-
sitivity check does not indicate robust SAM 3 performance
on this benchmark; instead, the more conservative configu-
ration suppresses nearly all detections.
Table 1 is an end-to-end map-parsing comparison: the vi-
sual baselines may differ in both region extraction and label
binding. By contrast, Table 2 freezes the predicted polygons
and visible-label policy, then compares the full-map GPT-5.5
labeling configuration with the GPT-4o per-region semantic
subagent. Because model and input scope still change to-
gether, this table compares the two deployed configurations
but does not independently isolate either factor.
For the GPT-4o per-region run, all 1,920 semantic records
were completed from 1,927 application attempts. Seven tran-
sient failed attempts affected six polygons, and all six reached
a valid terminal response within the retry budget. No seman-
tic record was dropped from evaluation.
A.3
Downstream Map Preparation
Section 4 ends with a labeled region map serialized as a
GeoJSON FeatureCollection. Corridor geometry and con-
nectivity are constructed afterward, before the trajectory
stage in Section 5. Figure 17 visualizes this interface: the
parser-produced regions are converted into a complemen-
tary corridor mask, region targets are placed in the same
metric space, and the corridor is skeletonized into the navi-
gability graph used by the Viterbi decoder.
This separation also clarifies the scope of Table 1: Area F1,
Region Purity, and Matched Label F1 evaluate the parser’s
region geometry and labels, rather than the downstream
corridor or graph construction.


Yun et al.
(a) Corridor mask and region tar-
gets.
(b) Navigability graph.
Figure 17: Interface between map parsing and trajectory fu-
sion. The labeled GeoJSON region map produced in Section 4 is
converted by a separate deterministic stage into the corridor mask
and navigability graph consumed in Section 5. These artifacts are
not parser outputs and are not included in the map-parsing metrics.
A.4
Qualitative Evidence and Remaining
Failures
Tables 1 and 2 report the aggregate geometry and label re-
sults. The examples below illustrate specific failure mecha-
nisms discussed in Section 4; they are qualitative evidence
rather than additional quantitative comparisons.
Exact-region OCR errors. Figure 18 fixes the target geom-
etry and gives PaddleOCR only the exact region crop. The
readable vertical HMV label is returned as AWH, while O2 is
returned as 02. Region isolation therefore removes spatial-
assignment ambiguity but does not, by itself, resolve OCR
orientation or glyph confusion.
(a) Orientation
GROUND TRUTH
HMV
PADDLEOCR
AWH
(b) Glyph confusion
GT O2 →
OCR 02
O → 0
Figure 18: Exact-region OCR failures. PaddleOCR reads (a) a
visible vertical HMV crop as AWH and (b) O2 as 02.
Full-map coordinate-binding error. Figure 19(a) provides
an illustrative cached full-map failure case. GPT-5.5 recog-
nizes VOGUE, yet its predicted coordinate falls inside the
adjacent UBERFONE polygon. Per-region labeling removes
this additional coordinate-prediction and polygon-binding
step. This example illustrates the failure mechanism and is
not used for the quantitative comparison.
Geometry-to-semantics cascade. Figure 19(b) illustrates
a remaining limitation of the factorized pipeline. For one
matched Crew-associated component, the predicted polygon
excludes the readable word. The resulting polygon-masked
crop therefore removes the visual evidence needed by the
semantic subagent. The adjacent Crew component, whose
polygon retains the text, is labeled correctly.
anchor
text outside
(a) Correct text, wrong polygon
anchor in UBERFONE
exact region
VOGUE
no binding step
(b) Geometry removes label evidence
predicted polygon
masked crop
labels = []
Figure 19: Two map-parsing interface failures. (a) A cached
full-map GPT-5.5 result recognizes VOGUE but places its coordinate
in the adjacent UBERFONE polygon; an exact-region input removes
this binding step. (b) For one Crew-associated component, the pre-
dicted polygon removes the readable word from the masked crop,
leaving no readable evidence for the semantic subagent.
B
Wi-Fi Semantic Evidence and Collection
Context
This appendix groups the evidence supporting the use of
ambient Wi-Fi as a weak semantic cue: collection coverage,
the sparsity and failure modes of lexical SSID–POI matching,
and the ambiguity of RSSI-based nearest-signal decisions.
B.1
Collection Coverage
Figure 20 summarizes representative urban and session-level
coverage. These figures document collection context; store-
level reconstruction remains grounded in indoor Wi-Fi ob-
servations, PDR motion continuity, and structured indoor
topology.
B.2
Lexical Similarity and Representative
Failure Cases
The character-level distribution shows a clear non-zero tail,
indicating that many SSIDs still contain partial POI-related
strings. However, only a small fraction of pairs reach strong
lexical overlap: 647 pairs exceed 0.8 at character level with a
precision of 52.2%, and 14,516 additional pairs fall between 0.6
and 0.8. Among word-level and TF-IDF pairs, high-similarity
matches (>0.8) achieve up to 100% and 90.0% precision re-
spectively, but account for only 11 and 40 pairs out of 185,140,


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
(a) Shenzhen density.
(b) Shanghai density.
(c) Hong Kong session context.
Figure 20: Representative Wi-Fi collection context. The density maps summarize two urban collection areas, while the Hong Kong
panel provides a session-level view of mobility coverage.
Table 6: Dataset statistics across six cities.
Metric
Hong Kong
Beijing
Shanghai
Shenzhen
Dalian
Nanjing
Total
Active hours (h)
59.3
5.8
208.4
225.5
2.6
101.3
603.0
GPS points
157,360
2,137
277,356
319,865
6,696
168,041
931,455
Wi-Fi observations
260,394
2,711
25,798
45,801
10,391
29,472
374,567
Unique SSIDs (raw)
21,303
984
1,730
2,125
1,604
1,274
29,020
Unique BSSIDs (raw)
56,615
1,742
2,541
3,199
2,832
1,922
68,851
Avg. SSIDs per scan
81.0
46.7
3.0
5.9
48.8
6.2
59.4
Table 7: Number of SSID–POI pairs by similarity range and
precision. Precision is computed over manually annotated same-
store labels.
Range
Cosine (Char)
Cosine (Word)
Cosine (TF-IDF)
0.0
9,731
184,841
184,871
0.0–0.2
33,454
3
3
0.2–0.4
72,318
131
65
0.4–0.6
54,474
137 (34.3%)
100 (9.0%)
0.6–0.8
14,516
17 (58.8%)
61 (44.3%)
0.8–1.0
647 (52.2%)
11 (100%)
40 (90.0%)
Total
185,140
185,140
185,140
showing that exact token matches are extremely sparse in
practice.
Table 8 illustrates a complementary failure mode: surface
string similarity can rank misleading SSID–POI pairs highly
even when the semantic explanation points elsewhere. These
examples justify using semantic reasoning over names, local
context, and map constraints; they are not presented as a
standalone quantitative benchmark.
B.3
RSSI Ambiguity
Figure 21 expands the Wi-Fi anchoring example from the
main paper. Nearby access points overlap substantially along
a single walk, and one signal window can remain compatible
with multiple neighboring stores. This motivates treating
the top-𝐾SSIDs as soft evidence rather than selecting the
strongest signal as the user’s location.
Table 8: Representative bad cases of Wi-Fi SSID–POI match-
ing. String similarity algorithms fail where LLM semantic reasoning
succeeds.
Wi-Fi SSID
POI
Best Sim.
SKH-SchoolDevice
SKH Holy Carpenter Church
0.693
Beauty
A Boutea
0.833
MNSGUEST
Monster Sushi
0.820
𝑎SKH-SchoolDevice: SKH is a dominant institutional prefix of the
Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui; “SchoolDevice” identifies a campus
device network, pointing to an affiliated lodging facility rather than
the church itself.
𝑏Beauty: “A Boutea” is a beverage brand whose name superficially
resembles “Beauty” in spelling; the SSID more plausibly belongs to
a cosmetics or personal-care venue.
𝑐MNSGUEST: MNS follows a typical three-letter property code
convention; combined with its location in the Miramar cluster in
Tsim Sha Tsui, the network is better attributed to Miramar Shopping
Centre’s guest Wi-Fi than to a restaurant abbreviation.
C
Additional Journal Examples
The following examples supplement the journal comparison
in the main paper. Underlined italic denotes ground-truth
POI names, and red denotes hallucinated or incorrect con-
tent.


Yun et al.
t = 0
entrance
t = 60
KFC
t = 120
Uniqlo
t = 180
atrium
t = 240
Starbucks
t = 300
H&M zone
t = 360
rebound
Time (s)
-90 dBm
-80 dBm
-70 dBm
-60 dBm
-50 dBm
-40 dBm
RSSI (dBm)
ambiguity zone
signal rebound
KFC_FREE_WiFi
Uniqlo_Store
Zara_Guest
Starbucks_WiFi
in top-10 (LLM visible)
out of top-10 (LLM invisible)
(a) RSSI variation. Solid lines indicate SSIDs in the top-𝐾
window; faded dashed lines indicate lower-ranked sig-
nals.
(b) Spatial layout. The corresponding mall trajec-
tory remains compatible with multiple nearby
stores.
Figure 21: RSSI ambiguity and spatial layout. The profiles and
map show why semantic anchoring is formulated as soft multi-label
inference rather than a deterministic nearest-signal decision.
Figure 22: Journal generation case 2: restaurant visit.
Figure 23: Journal generation case 3: shopping and dining
visit.


AirLog : Store-Level Indoor Life Logging Made Easy
D
Prompt Templates
D.1
Spatial Description Generation
This prompt converts GeoJSON store features into normal-
ized names, neighbor relations, and natural-language posi-
tion descriptions. The output is a compact spatial context
that later prompts can use without directly reasoning over
raw polygon coordinates.
Figure 24: Prompt template for spatial description generation
from GeoJSON floor-plan features.
D.2
Wi-Fi Semantic Anchoring
The following prompt maps Wi-Fi SSIDs to candidate store
locations via semantic similarity, relative signal strength, and
spatial context.
Figure 25: Prompt template for Wi-Fi semantic anchoring
using SSID semantics and signal evidence.
