WHAT HAPPENS DURING AUTONOMOUS
DEEP RESEARCH AFTER THE USER STEPS AWAY?
Yimin Liu1
Yijia Zhang2
Yanmin Li3
Tangwen Luo4
Yuze Li5
Ziling Yao6
Zhi Yang6
1 University of Southern California
2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
3 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4 Zhejiang University
5 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
ABSTRACT
In autonomous deep research, a user provides a task and relevant background,
then leaves the agent to conduct an extended investigation without further human
intervention. We study how this initial user information is reflected in intermediate
actions and how these actions relate to final recommendations. We introduce
DRaligned, a counterfactual behavioral evaluation framework built on PDR-Bench.
By varying one task-relevant user factor while keeping the remaining context
fixed, we compare acquisition requests, working drafts, and final reports. Source-
grounded extraction, blinded local judgments, and deterministic aggregation yield
coarse directional measurements while leaving ambiguous cases unresolved. Our
experiments show that strong user-specific delivery can emerge from a largely
shared research process: agents investigate similar broad questions but allocate
requests differently, and final recommendations distinguish user conditions more
clearly than explicit requests do. Reports can also integrate user factors that
were not jointly visible during acquisition. In readable draft-to-report comparisons,
recommendations often retain their coarse user-specific direction despite substantial
rewriting. Final directional differences recur across tested agent models, execution
harnesses, and evaluator models, even as execution paths vary. These findings
describe how initial user information shapes autonomous research and clarify the
relationship between the process an agent follows and the recommendations it
delivers.
1
INTRODUCTION
Autonomous deep-research agents investigate a task and prepare a report from an initial prompt
containing user background and constraints. Personalization benchmarks assess whether outputs fit a
user profile (Salemi et al., 2024; Samuel et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025b; Tao et al., 2025); PDR-Bench
extends this evaluation to research reports (Liang et al., 2026b). We ask a complementary question:
once the user steps away, what happens during autonomous research, and how do intermediate
actions relate to final recommendations?
We study non-interactive long-horizon execution: the initial task and user information remain fixed,
while the agent acquires external evidence without further human intervention. This differs from
personalization through conversation (Li et al., 2025), clarification (Luo et al., 2025), or requests for
human assistance (Trinh et al., 2026). The setting is relevant to software engineering, deep research,
and artifact generation (Jimenez et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2026b; Zheng et al., 2025); our question
1
arXiv:2609.33509v1  [cs.AI]  27 Sep 2026


concerns how previously supplied information appears in subsequent behavior, not how agents obtain
additional guidance.
We introduce DRaligned, a counterfactual behavioral evaluation framework. From PDR-Bench tasks
and structured user profiles, we construct matched conditions P and Q differing in one task-relevant
factor. We observe Acquisition (A) requests, Workspace (W) artifacts, and Finalization (F).
Source-grounded extraction, assignment-blinded local judgments, mirrored endpoint presentation,
and deterministic aggregation identify whether behavior expresses one endpoint, both, neither, or
remains unresolved. The resulting Matrix and temporal Flow describe coarse directional behavior.
Evaluators annotate observed content; controlled comparisons between conditions establish the
user-related contrast. The framework therefore studies behavioral user control without assigning
an unrestricted personalization score or inferring hidden reasoning. Acquisition, Workspace, and
Finalization are observation channels rather than mandatory stages: agents may return to retrieval
after writing, or finish without a public draft.
Our analysis shows that strong user-specific delivery can emerge from a largely shared research
process. Agents often investigate similar broad questions while allocating requests differently. Final
recommendations distinguish user conditions more clearly than explicit requests do and can combine
factors not jointly visible during acquisition. A public recommendation often retains its coarse
direction despite substantial rewriting. These are factor-specific observations, not evidence that global
user control switches on and off. Comparisons across models, reasoning settings, and harnesses reveal
different execution paths leading to similar directional outcomes, without establishing equivalence
between those settings.
Our contributions are:
• A counterfactual study of autonomous research: isolating how task-relevant user in-
formation relates to intermediate actions and final recommendations after human input
stops.
• A selective behavioral measurement framework: combining source-linked extraction
with directional Matrix/Flow readings and explicit uncertainty.
• Empirical findings on research and delivery: shared questions, changing request alloca-
tion, integration of user factors, and directional persistence through rewriting across tested
settings.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
PERSONALIZATION AND USER ALIGNMENT EVALUATION
LaMP evaluates generation from user histories (Salemi et al., 2024); PersonaGym studies persona
adherence (Samuel et al., 2025); PersonaFeedback separates response tailoring from persona inference
(Tao et al., 2025). PrefEval, PersonaMem, and AlpsBench evaluate preference following, evolving
profiles, and personalized memory (Zhao et al., 2025a; Jiang et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2026). PDR-
Bench evaluates personalization, content quality, and factual reliability in research reports (Liang
et al., 2026b). We use its task–user data to vary one task-relevant factor and compare observable
requests and recommendations. This complements report-level evaluation rather than replacing it;
local semantic annotation remains model-based. Crucially, user influence is assessed through the
controlled comparison, not directly assigned by the evaluator from a report alone.
2.2
DEEP-RESEARCH EVALUATION AND BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS
DeepResearch Bench and ResearcherBench assess report quality, research responses, and grounding
(Du et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025). Mind2Web 2 evaluates agentic search with task-specific judges
(Gou et al., 2025); DeepResearchGym provides reproducible retrieval (Coelho et al., 2025). LiveDR-
Bench represents intermediate claims and analyzes search structure (Java et al., 2025). AgentBoard
measures progress (Ma et al., 2024), AgentIF evaluates instruction constraints (Qi et al., 2025),
and Counterfactual Trace Auditing compares executions with and without agent skills (Zhou et al.,
2026). We instead intervene on user information and read factor-specific directions, without requiring
step-by-step alignment between independently generated trajectories. Our contribution is thus not
2


intermediate evaluation alone, but its use in studying initial user information during autonomous
research.
2.3
INTERACTIVE ADAPTATION AND HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP AGENTS
PersonaLens and UserBench examine personalization through dialogue and incremental preference
disclosure (Zhao et al., 2025b; Qian et al., 2025). IntentRL learns clarification before deep research
(Luo et al., 2026); τ-bench and HiL-Bench study tool–user interaction and help-seeking during
execution (Yao et al., 2024; Trinh et al., 2026). PAHF combines clarification, corrective feedback, and
user memory (Liang et al., 2026a). We study the subsequent execution after the initial task-and-user
prompt is fixed. Tools can supply new evidence, but no further human decisions or user-specific
information are introduced. We do not test whether eliminating interaction improves performance.
3
PROBLEM FORMULATION
3.1
LONG-HORIZON DEEP-RESEARCH EXECUTION
A user provides a research task T and initial user information U, after which an agent completes
the task without further human intervention or user input. Let πθ, E, and H denote the LLM policy,
external environment, and execution harness, respectively. We represent the system state as St =
(T, U, Ht, It, Wt, Dt, ηH), where Ht records observable events, It contains acquired information,
Wt contains intermediate work products, Dt is the delivery state, and ηH specifies the harness
configuration. An event et+1 updates the state through St+1 = F(St, et+1), producing a rollout
τ = (S0, e1, S1, . . . , eK, SK) ∼pπθ,H,E( · | T, U).
(1)
The task and user information remain fixed, while external observations and work products may
change. At submission, the delivered artifact is Y = render(DK). Keeping event history separate
from the current artifacts allows us to observe both revisions and their outcomes.
Execution harness.
A harness specifies how research functions are implemented and connected. We
write H = (R, B, Λ, Σ, Γ), where R = (RA, RW , RF ) realizes acquisition, synthesis, and delivery;
B = (BAW , BW F ) specifies their boundaries; Λ controls state access; Σ specifies scheduling
and coordination; and Γ provides logging and provenance. Our canonical harness H00 couples
both boundaries in one persistent executor, without mandatory handoffs or intermediate writing.
Alternative harnesses vary these execution relations without changing the task or user intervention
(Appendix B).
3.2
FUNCTIONAL OBSERVATION CHANNELS
We distinguish three functions: Acquisition (A), which seeks external information; Workspace (W),
which records intermediate analyses, drafts, and revisions; and Finalization (F), which commits a
user-facing deliverable. These functions concern the information, workspace, and delivery compo-
nents of St, respectively. For classified behavioral events, χ(et) ∈{A, W, F} identifies the function,
and Pc(τ) = (et : χ(et) = c) denotes the corresponding ordered subsequence. Acquisition and
workspace activity may interleave; the channels are not fixed stages. This functional view accommo-
dates different tools and execution architectures without equating their internal implementations.
3.3
COUNTERFACTUAL USER CONTROL
For a task-relevant factor f, we construct user conditions U P
f = C ⊕zP
f and U Q
f = C ⊕zQ
f , where
C is shared background and ⊕denotes prompt assembly. Only the selected factor changes, and
both conditions must remain valid for the task. Under matched model, harness, and environment
configurations, the conditions induce rollout distributions τ u
f , u ∈{P, Q}. Writing Bu
f,c = L(Pc(τ u
f ))
for the channel-specific behavior distribution, we study
∆f,c = Df

BP
f,c, BQ
f,c

,
c ∈{A, W, F},
(2)
where Df is the factor-relative directional comparison operationalized below. Behavioral user control
concerns a systematic response to this intervention, not merely the presence of user information in a
3


PDR-Bench User Context
Task
I want to compare several cloud database services
for my growing SaaS product.
...
Please recommend the most suitable option for
my deployment.
User Information
Runs a small SaaS team
Uses PostgreSQL today
Data must stay in the EU
Prefers managed services
Plays the violin
Factor Selection
Screened evidence
• Runs a small SaaS team
• Uses PostgreSQL today
• Prefers managed services
• Plays the violin
Data must stay in the EU
cross-check
LLM screening
Human review
Counterfactual Construction
shared background fixed
Is EU
US a valid counterfactual?
Same factor?
Only one value changed?
Both endpoints plausible?
Compatible with shared context?
Valid for the same task?
valid twin pair
Data residency
retained factor
User P
• Small SaaS team
• PostgreSQL today
Data must stay
in the EU
• Managed service
• Plays violin
User Q
• Small SaaS team
• PostgreSQL today
Data must stay
in the US
• Managed service
• Plays violin
LLM
screening
Human
screening
Trajectory Measurement
Acquisition
Workspace
Finalization
color = channel; cartoon icon = concrete action
P · EU
Q · US
search
read
browse
draft
revise
submit
search
search
draft
submit
Directional Reader
Node directions
Example for P: original P / flipped Q
read
OWN
NONE
BOTH
OTHER
OWN
NONE
BOTH
direction, not score
?
P
Q
Human validation
audit directional labels
Reader
Human
OFFLINE
AUDIT
Reader validation
Figure 1: Experimental construction and trajectory measurement. We select a task-relevant user
factor from PDR-Bench context, construct matched P/Q conditions that differ only on that factor,
and observe autonomous behavior across Acquisition, Workspace, and Finalization. Directional
labels and targeted human checks are applied.
prompt or output. A non-directional observation for f does not imply independence from all other
user information.
4
EVALUATION CONSTRUCTION AND DIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENT
We derive experimental materials from PDR-Bench (Liang et al., 2026b), which provides 50 research
tasks across 10 domains and profiles of 25 users. Our inputs use its Chinese tasks and structured
profiles, not its separate personalized-context files (Appendix A.1). Not every contextual detail
is relevant to a given task. We therefore first construct controlled interventions on task-relevant
user factors (Figure 1), then measure their expression through local annotation and deterministic
aggregation (Figure 2).
4.1
FROM USER CONTEXT TO LOAD-BEARING COUNTERFACTUALS
Evidence grounding and task relevance.
For each selected task–user pair, we form an evidence
pool EU = {e1, . . . , em}, retaining source locations and qualifiers. A factor is rejected if the evidence
can plausibly be true while the proposed factor is false. Given the task’s open delivery decisions
DT = {(Di, Ri)}, with valid realizations Ri, a factor is load-bearing if changing it can alter the
suitability ordering of at least one decision. This selects meaningful interventions without requiring
the evaluated agent to respond. The resulting P/Q conditions change only the selected factor and
retain all other user evidence as shared background. Construction is fixed before evaluation rollouts.
Human screening.
The author-reported screening protocol involved four Ph.D./master’s students
independently reviewing over 200 items each, with retention requiring unanimous agreement and
agreement with the automated assessment. Checks covered source fidelity, a shared underlying
factor, single-factor change, a clear and plausible contrast, and absence of answer leakage. The
retained archive covers an earlier, smaller construction review and does not independently establish
this expanded coverage. These screening criteria are not an accuracy estimate; Appendix D separates
the reported protocol from recovered annotations.
4.2
GROUNDED DIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENT
For an observation x, the factor-specific readout is rf(x) ∈{P, Q, B, N, ⊥}: the first four labels
indicate the P endpoint only, the Q endpoint only, both, or neither; ⊥denotes abstention. Evaluators
receive the task and anonymized endpoints, but not assignment metadata, paired trajectories, or
model/harness identifiers. These are offline readings: an Acquisition packet can contain other
requests, including later requests, whereas a document read uses that artifact alone (Table 13 in the
appendix). User information may still be inferable from the observed text.
4


Acquisition requests.
For A, the observation is an executed search query or read request. Evaluators
read the request rather than its return, measuring the direction expressed in the information sought,
not the evidence received.
Workspace and final artifacts.
For W/F, each read receives the full artifact with mechanically
indexed paragraphs and extracts source-linked items Jf(a) (Figure 2, left). Items record their
endpoint, semantic type, and recommendation role, separating the agent’s own advice from user
restatements and background, and main advice from alternatives, comparisons, mentions, and
rejections. Items are checked against the schema and source identifiers before aggregation. Only the
agent’s own main advice enters J main
f
(a). Code then computes
bv(a) = 1

∃j ∈J main
f
(a) : j expresses endpoint v

,
v ∈{P, Q}.
(3)
The pairs (1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1), (0, 0) encode P, Q, B, N, respectively, subject to the acceptance rule
below. This is presence aggregation, not a vote over item counts. Source references make the
annotations auditable, but do not guarantee exhaustive extraction.
Extraction
[p02] We currently
use PostgreSQL ...
[p05] A US region
is also available ...
[p08] We recommend
deploying in the EU ...
...
[p12] Ensure all data
remains in the EU ...
1
Mirrored reads
α = P
β = Q
α only
α = Q
β = P
β only
Swap back
to P / Q
P
P
retain
?
UNKNOWN
2
Matrix
user changes output
user does not change output
P
Q
P run
Q run
P
Q
P run
Q run
Separated
Same direction
P only
Q only
Both
None
Unknown
3
Cross-check
...
Figure 2: Directional measurement.
Full-
artifact extraction, mirrored reads, and counter-
factual Matrix construction.
Mirrored evaluation.
Each evaluator performs
two separate reads with the anonymous endpoint
order exchanged (Figure 2, center). Labels are
restored before comparison: α-only under α = P
and β-only under β = P both map to P. For
artifacts, each pass independently extracts its own
items and aggregates their restored labels. An ar-
tifact readout is accepted only when both passes
agree on direction and have an item-based main-
advice basis. Absence of extracted main advice, in-
cluding restatement-only outputs, therefore yields
⊥, not N. Disagreement, unresolved judgments,
and invalid reads also remain ⊥. Other evaluator-
model families repeat the procedure separately to
check coverage and directional conclusions, not
to vote on a pooled label (Figure 2, lower right).
Full prompts, schemas, extraction limits, and ac-
ceptance rules appear in Appendix C.
4.3
MATRIX, FLOW, AND VALIDATION
Matrix and Flow.
The Matrix Mf(u, b) = Zf(b; u) records directional states at behavioral loci
b under condition u. Figure 2 shows the absolute P/Q coordinates; relative to assignment, these
become OWN, OTHER, BOTH, or NONE, with abstention remaining UNKNOWN. Individual labels
describe behavior; user effects are assessed through the P/Q comparison, not inferred by the evaluator.
Comparisons do not require step-by-step alignment of tool calls across runs. Within a run, ordered,
comparable states form the Flow Zf,1 →· · · →Zf,L. Transitions from OWN to BOTH, NONE,
or OTHER denote broadening, dropout, or reversal; re-entry is the observed return of a previously
expressed direction. These are factor-specific transitions, not changes in global alignment. Unknown
observations never fill gaps or become neutral states.
Directional summaries and scope.
For identified artifact pairs, define s(P) = 1, s(Q) = −1, and
s(B) = s(N) = 0. The signed contrast is
di = s(rP
i ) −s(rQ
i )
2
,
di ∈{−1, −1
2, 0, 1
2, 1},
(4)
with positive values indicating expected directional separation and s(⊥) undefined. Acquisition
instead contrasts within-run mean request readouts. These summaries do not replace the Matrix:
BOTH and NONE remain distinct. We report readable coverage and fixed-panel missingness bounds
with the specified channel aggregation (Appendix C). The channels do not share a calibrated scale
of alignment strength, and unchanged coarse states do not exclude finer semantic changes. Earlier
measurement designs are documented in Appendix G.
5


Table 1: Experimental setup and coverage. Author-reconciled study totals; completed/started runs
count agent executions, not repeated evaluations. Each study and analysis subset retains its own
denominator.
Agent runs
Study
Tasks Models / setting
Interface
Pairs
Runs
Initial randomized
10 DeepSeek / off
Report tool
60 180/180
Exploratory
8 DeepSeek / off
4 setups
64 127/128
Main
24 Five families / lowest
Report tool
110 272/272
Reasoning follow-up
24 Five families / high
Report tool
88 175/176
Factor follow-up
12 Five families / high
Report tool
128 236/256
Harness comparison
24 Five families / lowest
H-R, H-W, H-D
360 701/720
Evaluation
Role
Model / annotators
Scope
Reads /
item
Primary
deepseek-flash / off
Main, follow-ups, harness
2
Auxiliary
gpt-5.4; claude-sonnet-5
Cross-family checks
2 each
Exploratory
deepseek-v4.1-flash
Exploratory study
2
Human protocol
4 reviewers + 1 adjudicator
13 × 24 = 312 targeted items per round†
1 each
Five recorded model families: gpt-5.4, claude-sonnet-5, gemini-3.8-flash, grok-4.6, deepseek-v4-pro. “Off”,
“lowest”, and “high” denote requested reasoning settings, not matched compute. The six studies report 1,691
completed executions from 1,732 starts; they are not pooled. †Expanded human counts use scaled early-audit
proportions (Table 2); recovered records are reported separately.
Human evaluation.
The reported protocol comprised two 13 × 24-item rounds with four
Ph.D./master’s students and a doctoral adjudicator. The supplied numerical accounting scales
proportions from a preserved 13-item audit to this expanded protocol; it is not a new item-level
validation. In the preserved audit, both principal reviewers matched the four accepted directions (4/4
each); pre-gate agreement among abstained items was 77.8%, and principal-reviewer agreement was
61.5%. The reported absence of opposite-direction assignments concerns those principal-reviewer dis-
agreements, not every adjudication. Section 5.5 retains the expanded accounting, while Appendix D
presents the recoverable original records.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We evaluate five agent-model families on an author-reconciled roster of 24 PDR-Bench tasks (Liang
et al., 2026b); coverage is in Table 1. The main study reports 272 runs and a 110-pair directional
panel. Pairs differ in one user factor; agents receive no further human guidance. Three evaluator
families independently read saved behavior. Re-evaluation does not add runs. Appendices B and F
preserve earlier analyzed subsets separately from the expanded roster.
For each channel c and evaluator, directional contrasts are averaged within tasks and then across
tasks:
dc
i =
yc
i,P −yc
i,Q
2
,
bDc =
1
|Tc|
X
t∈Tc
1
|It,c|
X
i∈It,c
dc
i.
(5)
Here yc is the channel-specific score, It,c the readable pairs in task t, and Tc the contributing tasks.
Unknowns are not zero; BOTH and NONE remain distinct. Confidence intervals and fixed-plan
missingness ranges answer different questions (Appendix F.2).
5.2
EFFECTS OF USER INFORMATION
Shared research questions can lead to different recommendations. An initial randomized study
establishes an effect of user information on delivery (T = 0.34, p = 6.3 × 10−4). In the exploratory
6


P
Q
Shared
93%
One-sided
6%
Subproblems
0
5
10
Within-user difference
0
5
10
Between-user difference
72% above diagonal
(a)
Shared research questions
(b) Request allocation
Figure 3: Research questions and request allocation. (a) Shared and one-sided subproblem visits
under paired user conditions. (b) Between-user versus within-user differences in request allocation.
The dashed line marks equality.
f1 only
f2 only
Neither
Unresolved
No A
f1 + f2
63%
f1 only
f2 only
Unresolved
A
F
Figure 4:
User factors across requests and final reports. Each line represents one run. A
summarizes expression across all requests; F shows expression in the final recommendations. f1+f2
denotes both assigned factors. Dashed lines indicate unresolved combinations; percentages use all
runs.
analysis, both user conditions visit the same broad subproblem in 363/390 comparisons. Cross-user
differences in request allocation exceed differences between repeated runs under the same condition
in 41/57 comparable subproblems (Fig. 3). Thus, user information can change how research is
distributed without necessarily replacing its broad agenda.
In the 110-pair primary panel, task-equal contrasts are bDA = 0.15 (95% CI [0.08, 0.24]) and
bDF = 0.83 ([0.72, 0.92]), with 79.1% and 62.7% readable, respectively. The same 55 common-
readable pairs give 0.17 and 0.83 (50.0% of the plan). Among dA = 0 pairs, 59.6% have readable
Final comparisons, and 27/28 of these (96.4%) separate in the assigned direction. These primary-panel
outcomes are not rescaled to the expanded roster; channel scores do not share an alignment-strength
scale. Model-level values are retained in Appendix F.
Final reports can combine factors that are not jointly expressed in requests. In the primary
two-factor analysis, 0/266 requests express both assigned factors, compared with 25/29 readable final
reports (Fig. 4). Additional profiles show the same qualitative pattern (2/275 requests; 26/32 readable
final reports; Fig. 16). Requests and reports are different units, so this is not a growth rate. The factor
follow-up’s expanded coverage is listed in Table 1.
7


BOTH
NONE
95%
OWN + BOTH
OWN
Same
Changed
Direction
0
0.5
1
Edit distance
0.41
0.84
(a)
W → F
(b) Text edits
Figure 5: Changes from draft to final report. (a) Final states of readable, text-different comparisons
starting from OWN; retention includes BOTH. (b) Edit distance for unchanged and changed directional
states. Dots show run–factor comparisons; labels mark medians.
Searching for an alternative does not mean recommending it. Documented cases include requests
associated with the opposite endpoint followed by main recommendations for the assigned endpoint
(Table 24). These are existence examples, not evidence that opposite-side exploration is common.
Transition denominators count eligible opportunities, not runs.
5.3
ANALYSIS OF DRAFTS AND FINAL REPORTS
Reports are usually saved near the end of research. Among main-study runs with both retrieval
and a saved draft, 84/86 save their first draft after the last retrieval action. This is the eligible timing
subset, not all runs; other timing results and notes are in Table 32 in the appendix.
Recommendations often retain their direction after rewriting. For the main-study draft-to-final
analysis, we compare the last saved draft with the Final report after excluding identical texts and
unresolved labels. Among 41 readable, text-different comparisons beginning from OWN, 39 retain
the assigned side and 38 remain OWN (Fig. 5). Among the 38 OWN→OWN comparisons, 18/38 have
normalized content-token edit distance of at least 0.5. Across readable text-different comparisons,
median edit distance is 0.41 when the directional state is unchanged and 0.84 when it changes. Thus,
large edits can preserve direction, although direction-changing revisions tend to involve larger edits;
they are not necessarily cosmetic.
5.4
EFFECTS OF EXECUTION SETTINGS
Different paths can reach the same recommendation direction. Same-task examples differ in
decisions, requests, and public drafting while reaching the same coarse Final direction (Table 25); this
does not establish equal quality or efficiency. The reasoning follow-up reports 175/176 completed
runs over 88 planned pairs. Its available matched analyses show longer execution without a consistent
directional improvement; GPT also changes API protocol, limiting attribution to reasoning alone.
The harness comparison reports 360 planned pairs and 701/720 completed runs: 120 pairs and 240
planned runs per interface. Directional comparisons in the archived analyzed subset remain positive
across interfaces, but neither equivalence nor delegated execution is established. Delegation was
available but unused there, and two file-based interfaces submit the saved report itself, making draft–
Final identity structural (Appendix F). These subset findings are not extrapolated to the expanded
execution counts.
5.5
RELIABILITY OF DIRECTIONAL EVALUATION
Agreement depends on the comparison level. Evaluator agreement is computed on common-
readable documents or pairs, not agent-run totals. The archived comparisons distinguish report-label,
8


Table 2: Updated human-evaluation accounting. Counts apply the preserved 13-item proportions
to the 13 × 24 = 312-item evaluation set.
Quantity
Count
Rate
Items per round
312
100.0%
Instrument accepted
96
30.8%
Instrument abstained
216
69.2%
Principal-reviewer exact agreement
192
61.5%
Principal-reviewer disagreement
120
38.5%
Pre-gate agreement among abstentions
168/216
77.8%
Two rounds contain 624 item-round observations in total. Counts retain the source’s proportional scaling and are
not independently recovered item-level judgments or a corpus-wide accuracy estimate.
exact-value, and pair-sign agreement; agreement on signs does not establish semantic ground truth
(Appendix F).
Human reference and expanded accounting. The author-reported protocol uses four Ph.D./master’s
students and a doctoral adjudicator in two 13 × 24-item rounds: 312 items per round and 624 item-
round observations. As specified in the supplied source, the expanded counts apply preserved 13-item
proportions, giving 96 accepted and 216 abstained items, 192/312 = 61.5% reviewer agreement,
120/312 = 38.5% disagreement, and 168/216 = 77.8% pre-gate agreement among abstentions
(Table 2). The absence of opposite assignments describes the preserved principal-reviewer pattern.
These scaled counts do not add independent annotation evidence; the actual recovered audit and its
limits are in Appendix D.
6
LIMITATIONS
Measurement resolution.
We primarily identify whether a selected user factor is expressed, not
how far behavior deviates from the user’s needs. Coarse endpoint changes are visible, but altered
priorities, omitted qualifications, factual errors, and subtle trade-offs may preserve the label. Absence
from a request also need not mean forgetting. Future work will measure recommendation strength,
constraint satisfaction, and consequential deviations at finer resolution, with explicit uncertainty and
independent validation.
Observation and validation.
Public artifacts do not expose internal attention or reasoning. Ex-
traction can omit content, and offline request packets can include later requests. Abstention limits
coverage; evaluator agreement is not accuracy. Recovered human records cover early targeted audits;
expanded human totals use proportional accounting rather than additional independently recovered
labels.
Scope.
The selected Chinese tasks, constructed factors, model routes, and shared retrieval backend
limit generalization. Many low-effort runs are short; follow-ups reuse tasks, and the archived
subsets do not fully cover expanded execution totals. API changes, unused delegation, and same-file
submission restrict individual comparisons. The findings do not identify causal stabilization, harness
equivalence, or benefits of removing human interaction (Appendices G and H.1).
7
CONCLUSION
We studied autonomous deep research after users provide their task and background. DRaligned
combines controlled user-information changes with source-grounded directional readings of requests,
drafts, and final reports. A largely shared research agenda can accompany user-specific recommenda-
tions; reports can integrate factors not jointly visible in requests; and recommendation direction can
persist through substantial rewriting. Different observable paths can reach the same coarse outcome
in the tested settings. These findings distinguish user influence from report quality alone and from the
assumption that every request must express user priorities. The framework supports finer, auditable
investigation of autonomous behavior and its relation to delivery.
9


AI USE STATEMENT
AI assistants were used in developing research questions and experimental plans, implementing and
checking analysis code, reviewing outputs, translating source material, and drafting or editing text,
figures, and LaTeX. Evaluator-model use within the experiments is specified separately in Section 4.
The authors are responsible for the submitted claims and citations. AI-assisted recomputation is not
described as independent human validation; unresolved source limitations are disclosed.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The supplementary material provides the prompts, tool schemas, aggregation rules, worked examples,
and records underlying the reported analyses (Appendices B–H). Tables distinguish execution totals,
analyzed subsets, and recovered human records. Original source files and translated excerpts are
linked through manifests; unavailable records and historical corrections are documented rather than
reconstructed.
REFERENCES
Jo˜ao Coelho, Jingjie Ning, Jingyuan He, Kangrui Mao, Abhijay Paladugu, Pranav Setlur, Jiahe
Jin, Jamie Callan, Jo˜ao Magalh˜aes, Bruno Martins, and Chenyan Xiong. DeepResearchGym:
A Free, Transparent, and Reproducible Evaluation Sandbox for Deep Research, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19253.
Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. DeepResearch Bench:
A Comprehensive Benchmark for Deep Research Agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2506.11763.
Boyu Gou, Zanming Huang, Yuting Ning, Yu Gu, Michael Lin, Botao Yu, Andrei Kopanev, Weijian
Qi, Yiheng Shu, Jiaman Wu, Chan Hee Song, Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao,
Hanane Nour Moussa, Tianshu Zhang, Jian Xie, Tianci Xue, Shijie Chen, Boyuan Zheng, Kai
Zhang, Zhaowei Cai, Viktor Rozgic, Morteza Ziyadi, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2Web 2:
Evaluating Agentic Search with Agent-as-a-Judge. In NeurIPS 2025 Datasets and Benchmarks
Track, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AUaW6DS9si.
Abhinav Java, Ashmit Khandelwal, Sukruta Midigeshi, Aaron Halfaker, Amit Deshpande, Navin
Goyal, Ankur Gupta, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Amit Sharma. Characterizing Deep Research: A
Benchmark and Formal Definition, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.04183.
Bowen Jiang, Zhuoqun Hao, Young-Min Cho, Bryan Li, Yuan Yuan, Sihao Chen, Lyle Ungar,
Camillo J. Taylor, and Dan Roth. Know Me, Respond to Me: Benchmarking LLMs for Dynamic
User Profiling and Personalized Responses at Scale, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2504.14225.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R.
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openre
view.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Li Li, Peilin Cai, Ryan A. Rossi, Franck Dernoncourt, Branislav Kveton, Junda Wu, Tong Yu, Linxin
Song, Tiankai Yang, Yuehan Qin, Nesreen K. Ahmed, Samyadeep Basu, Subhojyoti Mukherjee,
Ruiyi Zhang, Zhengmian Hu, Bo Ni, Yuxiao Zhou, Zichao Wang, Yue Huang, Yu Wang, Xiangliang
Zhang, Philip S. Yu, Xiyang Hu, and Yue Zhao. A Personalized Conversational Benchmark:
Towards Simulating Personalized Conversations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/25
05.14106.
Kaiqu Liang, Julia Kruk, Shengyi Qian, Xianjun Yang, Shengjie Bi, Yuanshun Yao, Shaoliang
Nie, Mingyang Zhang, Lijuan Liu, Jaime Fern´andez Fisac, Shuyan Zhou, and Saghar Hosseini.
Learning Personalized Agents from Human Feedback, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2602.16173.
10


Yuan Liang, Jiaxian Li, Yuqing Wang, Piaohong Wang, Motong Tian, Pai Liu, Shuofei Qiao, Runnan
Fang, He Zhu, Ge Zhang, Minghao Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Ningyu Zhang, and Wangchunshu
Zhou. Towards Personalized Deep Research: Benchmarks and Evaluations. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.2
5106.
Haohao Luo, Zexi Li, Yuexiang Xie, Wenhao Zhang, Yaliang Li, and Ying Shen. IntentRL: Training
Proactive User-intent Agents for Open-ended Deep Research via Reinforcement Learning, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.03468.
Sichun Luo, Yi Huang, Mukai Li, Shichang Meng, Fengyuan Liu, Zefa Hu, Junlan Feng, and Qi Liu.
ClarifyMT-Bench: Benchmarking and Improving Multi-Turn Clarification for Conversational
Large Language Models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.21120.
Chang Ma, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang, Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan,
Lingpeng Kong, and Junxian He. AgentBoard: An Analytical Evaluation Board of Multi-turn
LLM Agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13178.
Yunjia Qi, Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Amy Xin, Youfeng Liu, Bin Xu, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li.
AGENTIF: Benchmarking Instruction Following of Large Language Models in Agentic Scenarios,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.16944.
Cheng Qian, Zuxin Liu, Akshara Prabhakar, Zhiwei Liu, Jianguo Zhang, Haolin Chen, Heng Ji,
Weiran Yao, Shelby Heinecke, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and Huan Wang. UserBench: An
Interactive Gym Environment for User-Centric Agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2507.22034.
Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. LaMP: When Large
Language Models Meet Personalization. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. URL https://aclanthology.org/202
4.acl-long.399/.
Vinay Samuel, Henry Peng Zou, Yue Zhou, Shreyas Chaudhari, Ashwin Kalyan, Tanmay Rajpurohit,
Ameet Deshpande, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Vishvak Murahari. PersonaGym: Evaluating
Persona Agents and LLMs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2025, 2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.368/.
Meiling Tao, Chenghao Zhu, Dongyi Ding, Tiannan Wang, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, and Wangchunshu
Zhou. PersonaFeedback: A Large-Scale Human-Annotated Benchmark for Personalization, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12915.
Tu Trinh, Mohamed Elfeki, Guangze Luo, Kelvin Luu, Nathan Hunt, Ernesto Hernandez, Nandan
Marwaha, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Wang, Fernando Carabedo, Alessa Castillo, and Bing Liu.
HiL-Bench (Human-in-Loop Benchmark): Do Agents Know When to Ask for Help?, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.09408.
Jianfei Xiao, Xiang Yu, Chengbing Wang, Wuqiang Zheng, Xinyu Lin, Kaining Liu, Hongxun Ding,
Yang Zhang, Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, and Xiangnan He. AlpsBench: An LLM Personalization
Benchmark for Real-Dialogue Memorization and Preference Alignment, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.26680.
Tianze Xu, Pengrui Lu, Lyumanshan Ye, Xiangkun Hu, and Pengfei Liu.
ResearcherBench:
Evaluating Deep AI Research Systems on the Frontiers of Scientific Inquiry, 2025.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16280.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ-bench: A Benchmark for
Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2406.12045.
Siyan Zhao, Mingyi Hong, Yang Liu, Devamanyu Hazarika, and Kaixiang Lin. Do LLMs Recognize
Your Preferences? Evaluating Personalized Preference Following in LLMs, 2025a. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2502.09597.
11


Zheng Zhao, Clara Vania, Subhradeep Kayal, Naila Khan, Shay B. Cohen, and Emine Yilmaz.
PersonaLens: A Benchmark for Personalization Evaluation in Conversational AI Assistants, 2025b.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.09902.
Hao Zheng, Xinyan Guan, Hao Kong, Wenkai Zhang, Jia Zheng, Weixiang Zhou, Hongyu Lin,
Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. PPTAgent: Generating and Evaluating Presentations Beyond
Text-to-Slides. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.728/.
Xiaolin Zhou, Jinbo Liu, Li Li, Ryan A. Rossi, and Xiyang Hu. Counterfactual Trace Auditing of
LLM Agent Skills, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.11946.
12


A
TASKS AND USER CONDITIONS
Archive scope.
The records below document the construction rules, prompts, worked examples,
and archived qualitative analyses. Archived task, user-profile, model-roster, and execution-scale
counts are intentionally omitted in this version because those roster totals were reconciled separately
in the main paper. The main-text experimental setup is the authoritative source for current study
scale.
Language note. Chinese source material throughout this appendix (prompts, user messages, model
outputs, reviewer materials and report excerpts) is shown in English translation prepared for this
appendix; the untranslated originals are supplied with their hashes (Appendix H).
This appendix documents the source data, how one user fact became a pair of user conditions, which
conditions were run, and real construction decisions. Construction and evaluation prompts are in
Appendix C; the human review of constructed factors is in Appendix D. Unless stated otherwise,
construction and checking were carried out by language models under written rules. In the archived
material, recorded human screening of individual candidates is available only for the initial random-
ized study. The expanded protocol described in Section 4 has no corresponding item-level archive in
this package; other archived study factors were checked by models.
A.1
SOURCE DATA
All studies use the Chinese task and persona files of PDR-Bench (Liang et al., 2026b) from the
archived repository revision. The query mapping is used only to identify which source users are
paired with a task; conversation histories, English source files, and the PDR evaluation criteria are not
supplied to constructors or agents. PDR-Bench’s source participants belong to the source dataset and
are distinct from reviewers or annotators in this work. Tasks exposed in earlier development studies
are excluded from the main-study roster before construction. In the main study, the agent receives
one user message containing the task text, a shared user background, and the endpoint sentence(s),
separated by line breaks (Appendix B). Recorded attempts use this frozen task-and-user message. In
the exploratory study, the message also began with a research reference date; any task-specific date
clarification was applied identically across the paired conditions.
A.2
FROM USER INFORMATION TO TESTED FACTORS
A factor is one piece of user information with two endpoint sentences: P states the user’s recorded
situation and Q is a minimal counterfactual that changes only that piece, so that U P = C ⊕zP and
U Q = C ⊕zQ share the background C (Section 3.3). The studies used different construction routes
under the same counterfactual-construction principles; archived route-size totals are omitted here.
Main-study construction.
The PDR users paired with each task were ordered by a fixed hash, and
the constructor used the first eligible record unless it offered no valid factor. Each constructor saw
only the task text, these persona records and the written guide, never other tasks’ factors, trajectories
or results. Scanning the persona fields in stored order, it took the first task-relevant statement meeting
seven rules (box below), wrote P in the first person and Q as the minimal counterfactual, and recorded
a verbatim source statement of at least six characters with its field path. The shared background
(150–400 characters, first person) came from the same record and had to omit the factor and anything
coupled with it; deliberate omissions are listed in shared background exclusions. Each
factor also carries evaluation rubrics for requests and report items (Appendix C). A mechanical
validator checked the fields, that the source statement occurs verbatim in the persona record, that each
profile equals the background followed by the endpoint text, and that factor identifiers are neutral.
Rules for the background and the factor in the construction guide (English translation)
- First person, 150–400 characters, written as what this user would say to a research assistant.
- The content is drawn from the **task-relevant** real information in this user’s persona (identity, circum-
stances, resources, existing arrangements, etc.); it may be rewritten in colloquial language, but facts not
present in the persona must not be invented. A neutral transitional sentence is allowed only when necessary
for coherence (for example, “Finally, let me add one more thing...”).
- **It contains neither the focal factor itself nor any information coupled with the focal factor that would
13


Deep Research Task (PDR-Bench task 16, Travel)
I plan to take a two-week backpacking trip within the next three months, with the goal of exploring
in depth the diverse cultures and natural wonders of Southeast Asia, such as tropical rainforests,
historical sites and local communities. Please tailor an itinerary for me, including recommended
destinations, modes of transportation, accommodation options, local specialty food, as well as
safety advice, cost estimates and tips on local customs.
User condition P
ª
I am an undergraduate computer
science student, and I live in Suzhou,
Jiangsu.
Ô
My income comes mainly from my
parents’ support and scholarships[...]
G
When I travel I usually stay in budget
hotels or youth hostels; I value
cost-effectiveness, and I also care
about whether the place is clean.
ÿ
When traveling I’m used to
independent travel and planning my
own itinerary, and I’m quite interested
in historical and cultural sites,
museums and science and
technology exhibitions[...]
♂
Also, I am male.
User condition Q
ª
I am an undergraduate computer
science student, and I live in Suzhou,
Jiangsu.
Ô
My income comes mainly from my
parents’ support and scholarships[...]
G
When I travel I usually stay in budget
hotels or youth hostels; I value
cost-effectiveness, and I also care
about whether the place is clean.
ÿ
When traveling I’m used to
independent travel and planning my
own itinerary, and I’m quite interested
in historical and cultural sites,
museums and science and
technology exhibitions[...]
♀
Also, I am female.
Left out of both inputs (shared background exclusions, verbatim)
;
No name is written, since a name may carry gender associations.
;
Sports hobbies such as playing basketball every week or learning yoga off campus are not
written: in common perception these carry gender associations and would make one
endpoint seem more natural.
;
“Recently started planning to travel alone” is not written, since that is exactly the second
factor itself.
Figure 6: User conditions for one main-study task. Top: the task text as sent (English translation).
Panels: four sentences of the shared background as sent ([...] marks elided text; full messages in the
released sources) and the highlighted endpoint sentence (translation: P “Also, I am male.”, Q “Also, I
am female.”). The two user messages differ only in this last line. Black rows are identical in both
conditions and include facts considered but not selected as a factor, such as the home city. Bottom:
persona information the constructor left out of both inputs; the third entry is the source of this task’s
second factor, which was built but not selected (Table 6).
make one endpoint appear more reasonable or more urgent**. Content that is deliberately excluded is
written into ‘shared_background_exclusions‘, with each entry explaining why it was excluded.
[...]
**How to choose**: following the order of the persona fields, take the first piece of task-relevant informa-
tion that satisfies all seven conditions below at the same time. Do not go and pick the one where “the effect
is easiest to see”.
1. This information has real, consequential relevance to the task (it would change how a good plan should
be written);
2. Both endpoints are reasonable and could both occur in reality;
3. The original task text does not force either endpoint;
4. After switching to the other endpoint, this user remains coherent as a whole;
14


Table 5: Comparisons in a two-factor task (all four are defined in the derivation code).
Comparison
Factor changed
Factor held fixed
Use
PP vs. QP
factor 1
factor 2 at P
primary pair (main study and follow-ups)
PQ vs. QQ
factor 1
factor 2 at Q
additional profiles (main study)
PP vs. PQ
factor 2
factor 1 at P
main study; not in the main-text estimates
QP vs. QQ
factor 2
factor 1 at Q
main study; not in the main-text estimates
5. It is a minimal counterfactual: change only this one item and leave everything else verbatim unchanged;
6. Neither endpoint directly contains the answer;
7. It can coexist with the shared background.
**Two endpoints**: ‘P_endpoint_text‘ is the persona’s original state, written in the first person; ‘Q_
endpoint_text‘ is the minimal counterfactual.
The two endpoints are close in length and consistent in tone, and differ only in this one piece of information.
Independent AI reviewers then saw the task text, the background, and the two endpoints (as
anonymous labels in hash order, without rubrics) and checked the frozen fatal-problem cat-
egories: contradiction, endpoint illegal or implausible, task forces one
endpoint, endpoint states the answer and more than one thing changes. Un-
der a rule fixed beforehand, a factor was excluded only if both reviewers flagged the same category.
The archived review record contains a split flag illustrated in Figure 8; factors were frozen before
agent execution. The reviewers did not judge whether a factor is load-bearing (rule 1 was the
constructor’s judgment), and their review is not a human validation.
What reaches the agent.
Persona information falls into three groups. (i) The tested factor: its
endpoint sentence is the only text that differs between conditions. (ii) Shared background: identical
in both conditions, including facts that were considered but not selected as the factor, such as the
home city in t16 (Figure 6). (iii) Omitted information: absent from both inputs, either because it is
coupled with the factor (shared background exclusions) or because the background has no
room for it. Not selecting a statement as the factor therefore does not remove it from the input; only
group (iii) is absent.
A.3
MAIN-STUDY FACTORS
The exact archived task and factor roster is omitted from this count-free appendix. Construction rules
and representative accepted, rejected, and disputed factor examples are retained below; the current
experimental roster is reported only in the main-text setup.
A.4
TWO-FACTOR TASKS
The two-factor design combines the endpoints of factor 1 and factor 2 with one shared background,
yielding profiles PP, PQ, QP and QQ. For example, one task contrasts living with parents versus
living alone and, separately, two dog breeds. The primary comparison changes factor 1 while holding
factor 2 at its recorded endpoint; complementary profiles hold factor 2 at its counterfactual endpoint.
Table 5 states which factor changes in each comparison. Figure 4 uses the primary comparison, and
Figure 16 shows the complementary profiles.
A.5
EXAMPLES OF CONSTRUCTION DECISIONS
Table 6 shows one real decision of each recorded outcome type with its original endpoint texts;
two are expanded in Figures 7 and 8. They were chosen to illustrate the outcome types and are not
a sample of the construction record. Shading follows the recorded outcome (green accepted, red
rejected, yellow split judgment); the unshaded row was never judged negatively but was not selected.
15


Table 6: Real construction decisions. Endpoint texts verbatim (English translation). Outcomes are
the recorded decisions of the rules in force, not correctness judgments by the authors.
Candidate
P / Q endpoints
Recorded checks
Outcome
Accepted: main
study, t16, persona
gender field
P: Also, I am male.
Q: Also, I am female.
Validator passed; neither
reviewer flagged a fatal
problem
✓PASS
used in the
archived study
Built, not
selected: main
study, t16 second
factor (source
Recently started
planning to travel
solo)
P: This time I plan to go by myself; I
want to try traveling solo.
Q: This time I plan to go with two friends,
traveling together.
Validator passed; no fatal
flag; not selected by the
frozen two-factor
assignment rule
NOT
SELECTED
in no run input
Rejected: initial
randomized study
pipeline, persona
PDR PERSONA
017
P: Consults professionals for advice
before making investment decisions
Q: Does not consult professionals for
advice before making investment
decisions, preferring to rely on own
judgment
Both LLM verifiers failed
gate G2 (single dimension)
✗FAIL
not sent to
human review
Split review:
main study, t23
P: I currently live in Hangzhou, in a
rented studio apartment in the city center,
fairly close to my company.
Q: I currently live in Nanjing, in a rented
studio apartment in the city center, fairly
close to my company.
One reviewer flagged a
contradiction, the other did
not; exclusion required both
RETAINED
flag registered
Disputed: factor
follow-up, t46 x1
P: On spending: we are quite willing to
invest in our child’s education, and
generally don’t care much about price
when signing up for classes or buying
learning resources.
Q: On spending: we hope to save as
much as possible on our child’s education,
and generally pick the cheaper options
first when signing up for classes or buying
learning resources.
Designed as a soft
preference; one validator
judged the endpoints
mutually exclusive, the other
agreed with the design
DISPUTED
run, not in the
primary factor
contrast
B
EXECUTION AND HARNESS DETAILS
This appendix records how the agent runs were executed. It keeps three things apart: the harness for-
malism and its canonical basis as defined in the project’s frozen research foundation (Appendix B.1);
the implementations that were actually run for the studies in Table 1 (Appendix B.2); and the con-
formance checks that were recorded for them (Appendix B.4). The verbatim system prompts and
tool schemas are given in Appendix C; here we list tool names and argument fields only. Code field
names are kept as recorded. Chinese source material is shown in English translation prepared for this
appendix; the untranslated originals are supplied with their hashes (Appendix H).
B.1
HARNESS FORMALISM AND CANONICAL BASIS
The frozen research foundation defines a harness as H = (R, B, Λ, Σ, Γ). R = (RA, RW , RF ) are
the mechanisms that realize acquisition, workspace and finalization. B = (BAW , BW F ) are the
two boundary operators; each is either coupled or an explicit typed handoff. Λ is an access matrix,
Λ(actor, state) ∈{none, read, append, write, overwrite, spawn}, stating what each agent, tool or sub-
agent may do to the user information U, acquired information It, workspace Wt and delivery state
Dt. Σ is the execution topology (single agent; sub-agent spawn, delegation and return; coordinators;
routing and scheduling). Γ is the instrumentation contract: event logging, provenance, artifact
versioning, checkpoint/fork/replay, deterministic cache and environment rules, and state restoration.
Sub-agents, web tools, memory, planners and verifiers are mechanisms inside H, not additional
channels.
16


Rejected: the counterfactual adds a second attribute
p
Persona PDR_PERSONA_017, search prompt process_evidence_preference, proposer
claude-sonnet-5; P and Q as in Table 6. Declared changed dimension: whether professional
external advice needs to be sought as an evidence source before making a decision
Verifier 1 (qwen3.8-max), gate G2, verba-
tim
Endpoint Y introduces a second preference
dimension: ’more inclined to rely on own
judgment’ (more inclined to rely on own judg-
ment). This adds an internal reliance/self-
trust construct distinct from the declared di-
mension ’whether professional external ad-
vice needs to be sought as an evidence
source before making a decision’, which
concerns only the seeking of external pro-
fessional advice.
Gate results (verifier 1, verifier 2 = glm-
5.2)
§ G1 grounding: PASS, PASS
Ý G2 single dimension: FAIL, FAIL
§ G3 same construct: PASS, PASS
§ G5 no direct answer: PASS, PASS
§ G4, G6 (diagnostic only): PASS, PASS;
PASS, PASS
Decision REJECT_A: both verifiers failed the
same admission gate.
Figure 7: Rejected candidate (construction pipeline of the initial randomized study). Both
verifiers failed the single-dimension gate because the counterfactual adds a second preference (trans-
lation: “prefers to rely on own judgment). The verifier text is verbatim; the stored record of verifier 2
makes the same point.
Table 7: Canonical harness basis: frozen contracts and analysis status. Roles and tools are shown
as registered in each cell’s contract. Explicit-handoff cells were implemented in earlier development
work but are not analyzed in this paper.
Cell
BAW
BW F
Roles (tools)
Run status
H00
coupled
coupled
one persistent executor (search, read, write report, submit report)
RUN: main study, both
follow-ups, H-R; also the
exploratory study’s report-tool
setups
H10
handoff
coupled
W-controller (write report, submit report,
delegate acquisition); a fresh A-realizer per delegation (search,
read)
NOT ANALYZED: earlier
development study
H01
coupled
handoff
upstream executor (search, read, write report,
handoff to finalizer); separate Finalizer (submit report,
request upstream)
NOT ANALYZED: earlier
development study
H11
handoff
handoff
W-controller, A-realizer and Finalizer as above; the controller has neither retrieval
nor submission
NOT ANALYZED: earlier
development study
Crossing the two boundary states gives the canonical basis {H00, H10, H01, H11}; the first index is
BAW and the second BW F (0 = coupled, 1 = explicit typed handoff). The foundation calls this 2 × 2
a representational coordinate system, not the main experimental matrix: H00 is implemented in full,
and the other cells need only minimal adapters with conformance tests. Table 7 gives each cell’s
frozen contract and run status; the H00 contract used by the main study and the follow-ups is quoted
below.
Frozen contract of the canonical harness H00 (English translation; selected keys, other keys omitted [...])
{
"harness_cell":
"H00",
"A_W_boundary":
"COUPLED",
"W_F_boundary":
"COUPLED",
"six_mappings":
{
17


Split review: one fatal flag, retained by the pre-set rule
,
Task t23 (car insurance); P and Q as in Table 6. Shared background, excerpt: My hometown
is Wuhan; both my parents are still alive and live in a house in Wuhan’s old town, and I go
back to Wuhan to visit family twice a year.
Reviewer R2: contradiction.fatal =
true
The shared background says ’live in a house
in Wuhan’s old town’ (first person, present
tense), which directly conflicts with endpoint
A ’currently live mainly in Hangzhou’ and
endpoint B ’currently live mainly in Nanjing’.
The user’s actual place of residence cannot
be determined.
Reviewer R1: contradiction.fatal =
false
There is no contradiction between the task
text and the shared background. A home-
town in Wuhan and going back to Wuhan
twice a year can coexist with living mainly
in Hangzhou/Nanjing (factor one); the ex-
pected monthly driving of 800-1000 km
refers to car use at the place of residence
and does not conflict with visiting family in
the hometown. The good driving history is
consistent with the accident record.
Only one reviewer flagged the category, so the factor was kept and the flag registered. The
registration note checks the source text and finds no contradiction: the subject of “live in the house
in Wuhan’s old town” is the user’s parents (translation).
Figure 8: Split review in the main study (task t23). Reviewer answers are verbatim (English
translation); R1 and R2 are the two AI reviewers of this task.
"R":
"The three channels A / W / F are all realized by the same
persistent executor in the same context; evidence gathering, drafts
and submission are different tools on the same message chain.",
"B_AW":
"Coupled.
Raw tool returns enter the same context
directly; there is no handoff object and no cross-context boundary.
",
"B_WF":
"Coupled.
The drafts of write_report and the final of
submit_report are produced by the same executor.",
"Lambda":
"The single role can read T/U, its own full history, all
raw tool returns and all draft versions; it can write drafts and the
delivery.",
"Sigma":
"Single process, serial, single loop; no sub-context.",
"Gamma":
"Reuses the nd_harness event stream (assistant / tool_
call / provider_error) and the artifacts version chain; records model_
exposure_status item by item."
},
[...]
}
(Summary.) One persistent executor realizes all three channels in one context; raw tool returns enter
that context without a handoff object; the same executor writes the write report drafts and the
submit report final; it can read T/U, its history, all raw returns and all drafts, and write drafts
and the delivery; a single serial loop; events and the artifact version chain are logged.
What was formally represented and what was run.
Every run analyzed in the paper executed with
both boundaries coupled: one persistent executor retrieved material, wrote any drafts and submitted
within one context. H-W and H-D are not further basis cells; they keep both boundaries coupled
but change the tool and state interface (persistent files, a shell, file submission). H-D also offers
18


Table 8: Executed implementations. Tools are listed with their argument fields. “Final” is the
delivered report that the evaluators read.
Implementation
(studies)
Tools (arguments)
State visible to the agent
Drafts and final
Initial loop (initial
randomized)
search(query), read(url),
write report(content),
submit() with no argument
One context: system prompt, a
scripted clarification exchange
carrying the user condition, the task
request, own history, raw tool returns
Each write report overwrites
one draft; submit() delivers the
current draft, so the final equals the
last saved draft by construction
H00 report tool
(exploratory S00/S10,
main, both follow-ups;
H-R)
search(query), read(url),
write report(content),
submit report(content)
One context: system prompt, one
user message, own history, raw tool
returns (search: 6 results with
400-character snippets; read: first
6,000 characters of normalized page
text)
Each write report is a new
saved version; the final is the
submit report content or a
text-only reply, a separate object
from the drafts
Direct submission
(exploratory S01/S11)
search(query), read(url),
submit report(content)
As H00, without a draft tool
No drafts; final as in H00
H-W file workspace
(harness comparison)
search(query), read(url),
shell(command),
view file(path, offset,
length), write file(path,
content), edit file(path,
old text, new text),
submit file(path)
One root context plus a persistent
sandboxed /workspace; the shell
has no network, so external material
arrives only through search and
read
Files are snapshotted after every tool
call; /workspace/
deliverable.md forms the
report-draft chain; the final is the
exact file text read at
submit file, or a text-only reply
H-D delegation (harness
comparison)
H-W tools plus
delegate batch(tasks),
where each task carries
{assignment, input files};
workers: search, read, shell,
view file, write file,
edit file
Root as in H-W. A worker sees only
its assignment text, a read-only
snapshot of the selected files, and a
private scratch directory; not the root
history, sibling workers or other files
As in H-W; only the root can submit.
Worker replies return verbatim in a
fixed template. Offered, but no
recorded run used delegation
delegation to context-isolated workers, which would create explicit handoffs, but no recorded run
used delegation. H10, H01 and H11 were implemented in an earlier development study that is not
among the studies in Table 1; we report no results from it and make no claim about explicit handoffs.
The exploratory study’s four setups are not the four basis cells either: they cross two system-prompt
wordings with the presence or absence of a draft tool inside one coupled loop.
B.2
IMPLEMENTATIONS ACTUALLY RUN
Table 8 summarizes each executed implementation: its tools and argument fields, the state the agent
can see, and how drafts and the final report are recorded.
Message organization and user information.
In the initial randomized study, the system prompt
is followed by a fixed scripted clarification exchange (assistant question, user answer) that states
the shared background and, except in the task-only arm, the randomized user fact, and then by the
task request. Its system prompt asks the agent to keep the draft current rather than write only at the
end, and after a reply without a tool call the runner appends a fixed user-role message “(continue)”
(English translation of the recorded message) with no user information. In all later implementations
the user condition appears once, in the only user message (task text, shared background, endpoint
text; Section 3.3); the system prompt states that no further user replies will arrive, and a reply
without a tool call ends the episode. Every saved record of the main study, the follow-ups and the
harness comparison has exactly one user message and no injected one (checked for this appendix);
the rest are assistant turns and tool returns, which are external material, not user feedback. One
follow-up checking condition, outside the primary samples, appended once to a tool return the fixed
sentence “Before the next substantive decision, re-read the frozen user information and verify that the
decision remains consistent with it. Do not otherwise change the task.” The three harness-comparison
implementations send the same user message; H-W and H-D append one paragraph to the base
system prompt, stating that files in /workspace persist, that external material comes only through
search and read, and that submit file submits a file and ends the task (the original text and
an English translation are released with the source files). An H-D worker receives its own short
system prompt and, as its only user message, the assignment written by the root followed by a fixed
list of its input files.
19


Saved Report Submitted Verbatim (H-W)
ñ
Harness comparison, H-W; task t14, agent claude-sonnet-5, user condition P; run
HT_t14_Claude_H-W_P_a1. Chinese text in English translation; content argument and
hashes elided as [...]; full record in the data release.
Recorded tool calls and returns
e0002 search {"query": "beginner three-
month marathon training plan five days per
week one hour"}
e0004 search {"query": "beginner marathon
training plan 12 weeks run/walk method
injury prevention"}
e0007 write_file {"path": "/workspace/
deliverable.md", "content": "# Three-Month
Full-Marathon Beginner Training Plan
(Personalized Custom Edition)\n[...]"}
-> Written to /workspace/deliverable.md
(6389 characters).
e0010 submit_file {"path": "/workspace/
deliverable.md"}
-> Submitted /workspace/deliverable.md.
What the record stores
file_versions[0].layer: W_REPORT
file_versions[0].tool_event_id: e0007
file_versions[0].sha256:
a5402c640142981b[...]
terminal.reason: SUBMIT
terminal.delivered_from: submit_file:/
workspace/deliverable.md
sha256(terminal.delivered_text):
a5402c640142981b[...]
handoff_batches: []
§ One report draft, written at event e0007.
§ The final is the file read at
submit_file; its hash equals the draft’s.
® No draft-to-final change can be
observed.
Ý No delegation, notes or reads in this run.
Figure 9: A recorded H-W run in which the saved report is submitted verbatim. Excerpts of
the run record (event identifiers, tool arguments, tool returns and record fields), verbatim except that
Chinese text is shown in English translation; the equality of the two hashes was computed for this
appendix. Selected as the first H-W run file in lexical order; illustrative only.
Draft identity and versions.
In the H00 family, each write report call is saved as
a version (artifact version id, write event id, decision index, full text),
and the submitted report is stored separately in terminal.delivered text.
In H-
W and H-D, every workspace file is hashed after each tool call; non-empty versions of
/workspace/deliverable.md form the report-draft chain (W REPORT), other text files form
separate note chains (W NOTES), and handoff, export, input, log and cache files are never read
as drafts. Versions are ordered by event number, not file time, and identical texts are marked
IDENTICAL TEXT. The initial loop keeps one overwritten draft, recoverable from the saved mes-
sages, plus snapshots after 5, 15 and 40 effective actions and at the end that the agent never sees.
Saved report equals final by construction.
In H-W and H-D, submit file delivers the saved
report file itself, so the last saved report can be structurally identical to the final report (Fig. 9); these
harnesses therefore do not provide an independent draft-to-final persistence test. The same holds in
the initial loop, whose submit() delivers the current draft. A saved draft and the final can differ
only when the final carries its own content (submit report in the H00 family, including H-R) or
is a text-only reply.
Termination, retries and censoring.
Natural endpoints are SUBMIT (the submitted content or
file is the final) and ASSISTANT FINAL (the visible text of a reply without tool calls is the final).
BUDGET END and PROVIDER LENGTH CUT end a run without a new final: no extra model call is
made and a draft is never promoted to a final. An infrastructure failure after behavior has started
(INFRA FAILED) is right-censored and stays in the planned denominator. From the main study on,
a run slot follows a fixed limited-attempt policy, and a new attempt is allowed only if the failed one
produced no behavior; client transport retries resend the same request, and there is no semantic retry
or best-of-n. The harness comparison did not resume an episode after a failed slot attempt. The initial
20


Table 9: Agent model requests. Requested model identifiers and reasoning controls as sent. Some
routes use a local OpenAI-compatible gateway; a matching model echo does not verify the underlying
weights.
Family
Requested ID
Protocol
Lowest setting (main, harness
comparison)
High setting (both follow-ups)
GPT
gpt-5.4
chat completions;
responses in the follow-ups
reasoning effort=none
(reasoning tokens not visible)
reasoning effort=high;
dated echo
gpt-5.4-2026-03-05
accepted
Claude
claude-sonnet-5
chat completions
no reasoning field (no extended
thinking by default)
reasoning effort=high
Gemini
gemini-3.8-flash
chat completions
reasoning effort=low
(lowest accepted)
reasoning effort=high
Grok
grok-4.6
responses
reasoning.effort=none;
still reports reasoning tokens
not evaluated at the higher setting
DeepSeek
deepseek-v4-pro
chat completions (provider
API)
thinking:
disabled; zero
reasoning tokens required per call
thinking:
enabled,
reasoning effort=high
The initial randomized and exploratory studies used deepseek-v4-pro through a third-party hosted
endpoint with thinking disabled; later studies used DeepSeek’s own API. A small ablation subset sent no
reasoning field (provider default) on the relevant routes.
randomized study allowed one automatic replacement per slot for a failed model call; truncation at its
cap counted as an outcome and delivered the current draft.
Sandbox isolation (H-W, H-D).
Each episode has its own file system (about 256 MiB writable).
Shell commands run under bubblewrap with no network, a separate process namespace, no capabilities,
read-only system directories, no host repository or credentials, a cleared environment and a 60-second
limit; file tools refuse paths outside the workspace and symbolic links. Because the shell has no
network, every acquisition event is an executed search or read in all three harnesses.
B.3
MODEL REQUESTS, REASONING SETTINGS AND BUDGETS
Table 9 lists the requested model identifiers and reasoning controls; sampling settings, dates and
budgets follow.
Sampling, dates and budgets.
All studies used temperature 1.0 (not sent to Grok, whose route
does not accept it), at most 16,000 output tokens per call and no seed; from the exploratory study on,
requests set parallel tool calls=false, and tool calls returned together were executed in
order. Runs took place on 2026-09-02 (initial randomized study), 2026-09-10 (exploratory), 2026-09-
23 local time (main study, follow-ups) and 2026-09-23 UTC (harness comparison). From the main
study on, one episode ledger holds 96 model decisions, 192 tool actions, 96 acquisition requests and
128,000 output tokens; in H-W and H-D the root and any workers share it with tokens reserved before
each call, while H00 and H-R let the last call exceed the total by up to one call’s cap. The exploratory
study capped decisions (96) and tool actions (192); the initial loop capped effective tool actions at
120 (at most 360 model calls). No budget was shown to the agent; no implementation imposes a
minimum number of steps, a phase order, a writing step or a per-episode wall-clock limit; from the
main study on, retrieval requests time out after 90 seconds with at most three retries. “Thinking
disabled” has two qualifications: the initial randomized study did not save request bodies, so its
setting is the client default rather than a per-call record; and in the exploratory study three requests in
two analyzed runs were sent without the thinking-off field (thinking field sent = false) and
report 21, 14 and 110 reasoning tokens (checked for this appendix). From the main study on, the
DeepSeek client halts the route instead of dropping the field.
B.4
RECORDED CONFORMANCE CHECKS
Table 10 lists the checks recorded for the harness comparison and the two execution defects recorded
in earlier studies. The tests were written by independent AI verifier agents (not humans) against a
frozen acceptance list (A01–A64) and run on the frozen code before the first main call. Passing a
21


Table 10: Recorded conformance checks. Row shading gives the recorded outcome of each check
at the time it ran; fixes are stated in the evidence column. Requirement codes (A01–A64) refer to the
frozen acceptance list.
Check
Recorded evidence
Outcome
Harness comparison: before the first main call
Same input
Identical user message in all three harnesses, P and Q differing only in the frozen
endpoint (A01; no recorded mismatch at the end); H-R shows the agent the same
messages as the frozen H00 loop on a simulated response sequence (A09)
✓PASS
Endpoints: no forced final
A text-only reply is a natural final; budget end makes no extra call and never
promotes a draft (A13, A15)
✓PASS
Sandbox: process environment
The sandbox’s first process inherited the orchestrator environment, including a
provider credential, and a command line naming host paths and the run identifier,
which contains the user-condition label (D19). Fixed before any main call; no
development shell call had read it
✗FAIL
Isolation and budget
After the fixes: no path traversal or host links, secrets, other-arm text or shell network
(A17–A20, A28); a worker sees only its assignment and selected files, cannot submit
or delegate, and returns verbatim (A21–A25); one shared ledger that the shell cannot
bypass (A29, A30, A33). In all, 219 tests for 64 requirements passed and 52 injected
mutations were detected
✓PASS
Harness comparison: during and after the main runs
Route halt
A provider error unrelated to reasoning halted the whole DeepSeek route; an inde-
pendent verifier judged this inconsistent with the frozen routing rule. Minimal fix;
the affected run was recorded as censored after behavior and 6 unstarted slots were
resumed; regression 220 of 221 tests passed, 1 skipped by design (D26, D27)
✗FAIL
Wave health checks
the frozen wave-level checks (model echo, reasoning witness, budget, file prove-
nance, no delegation in H-W, record hashes) before and after the fix
✓PASS
Delegation used
Offered in H-D and exercised in development runs by all tested families; not used in
the analyzed harness runs, so delegated execution was not tested
NOT EXERCISED
Mechanical audit
All 240 slots audited; one flag, a request interrupted by a retrieval error before its
resource was recorded (URL kept in the tool arguments); not a violation
✓PASS
Recomputation
Independent recomputation from raw evaluator replies, without importing the pro-
duction modules: 7214 of 7214 items equal
✓PASS
Earlier studies
Main study: tool calls
The gateway split some Claude replies into several choices and the client kept only
the first, dropping tool calls. Fixed by merging choices; the 4 affected attempts were
invalidated and replaced
✗FAIL
Initial study: runner
The retrieval tool crashed the runner on a non-ASCII URL in an archived run;
replaced as an infrastructure failure, harness left unchanged during the run
✗FAIL
check does not show that a capability was used: delegation passed offline and development tests with
all tested families but was never exercised in the main runs.
Two limits follow from these records. First, the harness comparison varies the tool and state interface
while all executed runs keep both boundaries coupled; it does not test cross-context delegation or
explicit finalization. Second, the initial loop differs from H00 in its system prompt (which encourages
continuous drafting), its argument-free submission and its step cap, so the two “report tool” labels in
Table 1 denote related but not identical implementations.
C
PROMPTS AND DIRECTIONAL EVALUATION
This appendix reproduces the text that models actually received and specifies how evaluator outputs
become the directional labels of Section 4.2. This first part covers the generation side: the prompts
used to construct user conditions (Appendix C.1) and the inputs given to the research agent (Ap-
pendix C.2). The second part covers the evaluation side: the prompt for acquisition requests, the
extraction prompt and schema for drafts and final reports, the mirrored reads, and the deterministic
rules for aggregation, acceptance, and abstention.
Conventions.
Each box is a mechanical copy of a source file in the version used by the runs: LaTeX
special characters are escaped, line breaks follow the source, and the wording is unchanged. Titles
state the original language; boxes contain no translations. [. . . ] marks an omission, <REPO> replaces
a local path, and bold sans-serif labels inside a box are our annotations. The line under each box
gives the file, the locator, and the first 16 hexadecimal digits of the file’s SHA-256; complete copies
are in the supplementary material (appendix_sources/C1/).
22


C.1
PROMPTS FOR CONSTRUCTING USER CONDITIONS
User conditions were fixed before the first agent run of each study, but the procedure differed
across studies (Table 11). In the main study, whose cards the reasoning follow-up and the harness
comparison reuse, every construction judgment was made by a model. One constructor session per
task (claude-opus-5-5, a workflow subagent with file and shell access) followed a written protocol
and wrote a factor card: the shared background C, the P endpoint (the profile’s own state, with
a verbatim quote of the profile field), the Q endpoint (a minimal counterfactual), and the rubrics
later used by the evaluators. The protocol fixes the choice in advance: use the first profile in a fixed
hash order and take the first profile field, in field order, that meets seven conditions, rather than the
factor expected to show the largest effect. After a script accepted the card, two reviewer sessions
(claude-haiku-4-5-20251001) read an anonymized packet, with the endpoints shown as A and B
in hash order and the rubrics withheld, and checked five fatal problems. Before its task message,
each constructor and reviewer session also received a one-line operator message relayed by the
workflow harness; it concerned agent reasoning settings and gave no construction instruction (copy
in the supplementary material). No human reviewed the main-study cards; the human screening in
Section 4.1 was applied to the candidate pool of the initial randomized study (Appendices A and D).
Prompt for factor-card construction, main study (English translation)
You are the factor-card constructor for the third-round experiment, responsible only for task t8. Working
directory: <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1
First read the procedure in full: <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/R3_CARD_CONSTRUCTION_
GUIDE.md , and follow it strictly.
Input: <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/CONSTRUCTION_INPUTS/t8.json (the task text,
whether it is a core task, and the raw PDR user personas sorted in a fixed order).
Output: <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/CARDS_DRAFT/t8.json
Hard requirements:
- Work only from the task text and the personas. Do not open any trajectory, reading or result file from old
experiments, and do not look at the cards of other tasks under CARDS_DRAFT.
- After writing, run: cd <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1 && python3 scripts/r3_card_validate.py
CARDS_DRAFT/t8.json ; if it outputs FAIL, revise according to the hints until it gives PASS. Change only
the problems that were pointed out.
- After PASS, run: cd <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1 && python3 scripts/r3_review_packet.py 8 ,
to generate the anonymized review packet.
- If the task is judged ineligible under Section 8 of the procedure, write a file containing only {"taskid",
"status":"INELIGIBLE","reason"}, and do not run the validator or the review-packet script.
- Write all card content in Chinese.
Finally, return according to the schema: status, which user was used, how many were skipped, the second-
factor status (fill in NOT_CORE for non-core tasks), the verbatim text of the validator’s last output, the
review-packet path, and a one-sentence explanation.
Source: workflow r3-factor-cards, session construct:t8, second user turn (transcript agent-accc0eecf70ec83d9.jsonl,
sha256 fb7d7eae7962c38d); template in workflow record wf 4c15923f-4c8.json (008883c634271f80). The other tasks
received the same text with their own task number.
Prompt for factor-card construction: protocol read by the constructor, §4 (English translation)
## 4. Focal factor ‘focal_factor‘ (ID fixed as ‘t<task number>_f1‘)
**How to choose**: following the order of the persona fields, take the first piece of task-relevant information
that satisfies all seven conditions below. Do not go picking the one where "the effect is easiest to see".
1. The information has real, consequential relevance in the task (it would change how a good plan should
be written);
2. Both endpoints are reasonable and could both occur in reality;
3. The task text does not force either endpoint;
4. After switching to the other endpoint, this user is still coherent as a whole;
5. It is a minimal counterfactual: change only this one item and leave everything else verbatim unchanged;
6. Neither endpoint directly contains the answer;
7. It can coexist with the shared background.
**Two endpoints**: ‘P_endpoint_text‘ is the persona’s original state, written in the first person; ‘Q_
endpoint_text‘ is the minimal counterfactual.
23


The two endpoints are close in length, consistent in tone, and differ only in this one piece of information.
‘source_user_statement‘ must be taken **verbatim** from the persona record (the record is JSON and its
field values are strings; directly copy a contiguous span of at least 6 characters from one of them);
‘source_persona_field‘ gives its location in the persona, for example ‘Financial information.Financial
situation.Asset status‘.
[. . .]
Source: exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/R3_CARD_CONSTRUCTION_GUIDE.md, lines 31–46 of 136 (sha256 b365edab646f7e74,
as registered in the main-study design freeze). Omitted: lines 1–30 (deliverable; use the first profile unless it has no usable task-relevant
information; shared background of 150–400 characters that excludes the factor and anything coupled to it), lines 47–60 (fields kind, scope,
relation between endpoints, eligibility rule), lines 61–136 (evaluator rubrics, second factor, profile assembly, ineligibility,
template).
Prompt for input review, main study (English translation)
You are an input reviewer (ID R1), reviewing the user-condition design of a research task. Read only this
one file: <REPO>/exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/REVIEW_PACKETS/t8.md
Do not open any file outside that directory (in particular, do not look at CARDS_DRAFT, REVIEW_
PACKETS_PRIVATE_KEYS, or any experimental results). Answer independently, without consulting
anyone else’s opinion.
The packet contains: the original text of one task; the shared background of one user; and the two
anonymous endpoints (A/B) of one swapped piece of user information. The core task also has a second,
independently swapped piece of information.
The experiment will have a research assistant complete the task independently under “shared background +
A” or “shared background + B”, and then compare the behavior on the two sides.
I. Fatal-problem check (judge fatal=true only when the problem genuinely holds, and in detail point out
which two places in the original text are involved):
1 contradiction: the original task text, the shared background, and the endpoints contradict one another;
2 endpoint_illegal_or_implausible: an endpoint is unreasonable in reality, or is not self-consistent when
placed together with the shared background;
3 task_forces_one_endpoint: the original task text already forces one of the endpoints, and the other
endpoint conflicts with the task requirements;
4 endpoint_states_the_answer: the endpoint text directly states what recommendation or conclusion
should be given;
5 more_than_one_thing_changes: besides this one piece of information, endpoints A and B also
simultaneously change other user information.
“This information may have little effect on the result” and “it is hard to measure” are not fatal problems;
do not judge fatal on those grounds.
[. . .]
Return according to the schema. Set taskid to 8.
Source: workflow r3-factor-cards, session review:t8:R1, second user turn (agent-a05ebcbd7810f943b.jsonl, sha256
8db40c5c3d1bb6a4). Omitted: lines 15–20, a second question on where the factor should act (EVIDENCE DIFFERENT,
SELECTION DIFFERENT, BOTH, UNRESOLVED), recorded as an input-only prior. Packet:
exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/REVIEW_PACKETS/t8.md (b83eb7c51a0cb780). Reviewer R2 received the same text with “R2”.
Prompt for counterfactual twin construction, initial randomized study (original English; system message)
You construct ONE counterfactual twin pair for an experimental user-evidence
treatment.
The original evidence is grounded in a human-authored source.
Your job is NOT to improve the source wording and NOT to optimize for a judge.
Construct:
- one endpoint that faithfully preserves the source-grounded user evidence;
- one strong-but-plausible counterfactual endpoint on the SAME underlying
user dimension.
The two endpoints must differ on only ONE dimension.
You MUST NOT introduce:
- a new goal;
- a new budget unless budget is the target dimension;
- a new deadline unless time horizon is the target dimension;
- new authority;
24


- new expertise;
- a concrete downstream option;
- a direct answer;
- a second independent preference.
The counterfactual should be strong enough to create a meaningful contrast,
but it must remain a coherent human position.
Return JSON only.
All natural-language output values must use the same language as SOURCE_TEXT.
Do not translate the source evidence or the proposed treatment endpoints.
JSON keys stay in English; only the values follow the source language.
Source: exp_v1/src/experiments/exp_a/prompts.py, A2 SYSTEM (file sha256 7913d150324a1481); the prompt hash
recomputed from this file equals the pre-call hash 8623bb9bb5137e77 registered in A00 FREEZE MANIFEST PRECALL.json. Not
shown: the user template (A2 USER TEMPLATE: source evidence, declared dimension, evidence type, and abstract decision interface in;
source grounded endpoint, counterfactual endpoint, shared core, changed dimension, held fixed,
counterfactual rationale out) and the proposal (A1) and verifier (A4) prompts, which match their registered hashes; all are in the
supplementary material.
C.2
AGENT PROMPTS, INPUTS, AND TOOLS
Every main-study run used the report-tool harness H00 (Appendix B): one system message (P0), one
user message rendered from a fixed template, and four tool schemas. The template places the task
text, the shared background C, and the endpoint text zu
f in that order; in the two-factor extension
both endpoint texts fill the last slot. Afterwards the agent receives only tool results and fixed harness
receipts, such as “Draft saved.” after write report; budgets are not shown. In the saved records
of all main-study runs, the message history holds exactly one system and one user message, and
every first request carries the same four tool schemas in the same order. Other studies and harnesses
changed the system message as listed in Table 12; their full texts are in the supplementary material.
Prompt for the research agent: system message and user-message template (English translation)
System message P0 (main study, follow-ups, H-R; exploratory setups S00, S01)
You are a research assistant. Please complete the user’s research task, use the available tools as needed, and
submit a research report. You will not receive any new user replies during this run.
User message template (all studies except the initial randomized study)
Research task:
{task_text}
User background:
{common_background}
{one_user_factor_endpoint}
Source: exp_v2/NATURAL_USER_CONTROL_ROBUST_DISCOVERY_V1/02_ACTOR_PROMPTS_AND_TOOLS.json, keys
prompts.P0 and user render template (file sha256 dfc38b4a004892e5, checked by the runner at load; text hash of P0
e947a39d6c767381, as recorded in every main-study run). Variants in the supplementary material: prompts.P1 in the same file; root and
worker messages in exp_v2/HARNESS_TRANSPORT_V1/HARNESS_CONTRACTS/H-D.json (42ec3c9160e1b3a6).
Tool schemas sent in the first request of every main-study run (H00; JSON)
[
{"type":
"function", "function":
{"name":
"search", "description":
"Search external sources and return result titles, URLs, and
snippets.", "parameters":
{"type":
"object", "properties":
{"query":
{"type":
"string"}}, "required":
["query"],
"additionalProperties":
false}}},
{"type":
"function", "function":
{"name":
"read", "description":
"Read the body text of the material at the specified URL.",
"parameters":
{"type":
"object", "properties":
{"url":
{"type":
"string"}}, "required":
["url"], "additionalProperties":
false}}},
{"type":
"function", "function":
{"name":
"submit_report",
"description":
"Submit the final research report in content and end
the task.
The report uses free text.", "parameters":
{"type":
25


"object", "properties":
{"content":
{"type":
"string"}},
"required":
["content"], "additionalProperties":
false}}},
{"type":
"function", "function":
{"name":
"write_report",
"description":
"Save or replace the current report draft.
This
operation does not submit the report or end the task.
The draft uses
free text.", "parameters":
{"type":
"object", "properties":
{"content":
{"type":
"string"}}, "required":
["content"],
"additionalProperties":
false}}}
]
Source: exp_v2/ROUND3_FINAL_V1/RUNS_D/requests/R3_a7f5fa6695ff4e007c9b9217_a1.jsonl, line 1, key
body.tools (fcd9962de8c373a3), one tool per line. The request also sets "parallel tool calls":
false.
Figure 10 shows one real filled input, the first user message of the paired DeepSeek runs for task 8;
the two runs sent it in the same second, and the texts differ only in the last sentence, which states
the city of residence. The complete first request of the P run is in the supplementary material; its
parameters are those of the DeepSeek row of Table 12(b).
Deep Research Task (PDR-Bench task 8)
Û
Research task:
I want to be promoted to a management position at my company in the future. I have
experience independently leading projects, but I feel I lack experience in team
communication and task coordination. I would like to know how to systematically improve
my leadership and management abilities, especially in communication and coordination,
motivating a team, and decision-making. Please help me plan a concrete learning path,
recommend some suitable books, online courses, or training programs, and tell me which
practical opportunities, at work or outside work, I should focus on seizing to build these
abilities.
Shared background C (identical in both conditions)
¹
User background:
I am around thirty years old and work as an algorithm engineer, with a formal
computer-science education; in graduate school I worked on artificial intelligence and
recommender systems and also published related papers. Most of my working time is
spent writing code and tuning models. My personality is fairly calm and rational, and I like
logical reasoning and deep thinking; I am quite talkative with people I know, but fairly
introverted with strangers. When making decisions I am used to making up my own mind,
usually reaching conclusions through data analysis and logical reasoning; when facing a
major choice I listen to the opinions of my parents or my advisor. I am more productive in
the evenings and usually like to use evening time to learn new things. With money I am
fairly rational and value cost-effectiveness, but I am still willing to invest some in
educational courses.
User condition P
½
I currently live in Hangzhou, where I
rent a studio apartment in the city,
fairly close to my company.
User condition Q
½
I currently live in Shenzhen, where I
rent a studio apartment in the city,
fairly close to my company.
Figure 10: A real filled input from the main study (English translation). The first user message of
each run is the task box, a blank line, the background box, and that run’s colored endpoint sentence
on the next line; the endpoint (Hangzhou vs. Shenzhen) is the only difference. Icons are decorative.
Runs R3 a7f5fa66... (P) and R3 00e356fb... (Q), DeepSeek; request journals, line 1, key
body.messages[1].content (sha256 fcd9962de8c373a3 and 0356b16a99735794).
Table 12 lists what differed across studies, harnesses, and model families; tool returns, budgets, and
termination are in Appendix B. Two further inputs reached some agents after the first message. The
runner of the initial randomized study appended the fixed user-role message (continue) (“continue”,
translation) when the agent replied without calling a tool; it carries no user information. A separate
26


mitigation arm of the follow-ups, not counted in Table 1, appended the fixed sentence “Before the
next substantive decision, re-read the frozen user information and verify that the decision remains
consistent with it. Do not otherwise change the task.” once to a tool return (exp_v2/ROUND4_FI
NAL_V1/MITIGATION_DESIGN.json, key checkpoint text; see Appendix F).
Table 12: Agent inputs across studies, harnesses, and model families. (a) Tools are listed in the
order sent. (b) Request fields that differed across families, read from the first request of every run; all
other fields were shared: temperature 1.0 (not sent to Grok), an output cap of 16000 tokens per call,
and parallel tool calls false.
(a) Studies and harnesses: differences from the main study
Setting
System message, user information, and tools
Initial randomized
Own system message, which asks the agent to keep an initially empty plan draft current (do
not wait until the end to start writing); user information given as a clarification exchange
before the task request, with the factor answer omitted in the task-only arm; the request
adds fixed research and decision-summary blocks; tools search, read,
write report, submit (run-time schemas not located)
Exploratory
P0, or P1 (a rewording of P0); the task text begins with a reference-date line; setup
H DIRECT offers no write report
Main
P0; template; in two-factor runs both endpoint texts fill the last slot; tools as in the box
above
Follow-ups
As main; the reasoning follow-up uses the main-study cards, the factor follow-up its own
cards
Harness H-R
As main
Harness H-W
P0 plus a paragraph on the persistent /workspace and submit file; tools search,
read, shell, view file, write file, edit file, submit file
Harness H-D
As H-W plus delegate batch; a worker has its own system message, receives only its
assignment text and copies of the files it is given, and has the H-W tools except
submit file
(b) Model families
Family (model)
Main study and harness
comparison
Reasoning and factor follow-ups
GPT (gpt-5.4)
Chat completions;
reasoning effort none
Responses API;
reasoning.effort high
Claude (claude-sonnet-5)
Chat completions; no reasoning field
reasoning effort high
Gemini (gemini-3.8-flash)
Chat completions;
reasoning effort low
reasoning effort high
Grok (grok-4.6)
Responses API;
reasoning.effort none
Not run
DeepSeek
(deepseek-v4-pro)
Official API; thinking disabled
thinking enabled;
reasoning effort high
GPT, Claude, Gemini, and Grok were reached through an OpenAI-compatible gateway; the echoed model name
was checked, which does not verify the underlying model. The thinking-ablation runs of the main study sent no
reasoning field. The initial randomized and exploratory studies used deepseek-v4-pro on a third-party host with
thinking off (Table 1).
C.3
ACQUISITION REQUEST EVALUATION
This part documents the evaluation side of the measurement as run in the main cross-model study:
prompts as sent, one filled instance per prompt with raw responses, validation, the mirrored-read
decision, and aggregation. The main study sent 572 request packets, 800 item-extraction packets for
drafts and final reports, and 24 repeated final-report packets that only measure re-reading variation; no
packet asks for a document-level direction (Appendix C.5). The evaluator modules are byte-identical
to those registered for the follow-up studies and the harness comparison; the main study registered no
code hashes, so its use of the same bytes is inferred from file dates.
What the evaluator sees.
Each read is one API call whose only message is the prompt
text of one packet (Table 13).
Assignment blindness is enforced when packets are built:
assert no leak keys rejects fields named after run metadata (e.g. run uid, endpoint,
27


profile code, condition, family, user text), and assert blind rejects a packet
that contains any of the run’s actual metadata values. The evaluator is thus blind to metadata, not
necessarily to the arm, since an evaluated text can restate the user’s situation. A request packet also
shows the other requests of the same run in that packet, including later ones; documents are read one
at a time.
Table 13: Content of the evaluator prompts. The prompt of one packet, sent as a single user
message, is all an evaluator receives; the manifest (orientation, run identity) stays on the program
side.
Information
Request evaluation
Document extraction
Task text given to the agent
§
§
Factor: endpoint texts as
ALPHA/BETA, type, scope,
unknown cases
§ with
request support rubric
§ with
final action rubric
Request texts (query or URL) of
the run
§ up to 32 per packet, 12 with
two factors
Ý
Document text
Ý
§ one document, numbered
paragraphs
Tool returns; other document
versions
Ý
Ý
Shared background, user message,
assigned endpoint, run, model,
condition, paired run
Ý (checked at packet build)
Ý (checked at packet build)
Prompt identity (sha256)
template 3bd171a000377f76
system 8c0a0b9eec2e016e,
instruction
f81c6e6127baf033
Unit and prompt.
The unit is one executed search or read call, represented by its query or
URL; the evaluator labels every request for every factor of the run and must quote the request verbatim
for a directional label. The template is the frozen code constant: doubled braces are sent as single
braces, and the five fields in braces are filled per packet. The instance is the materials section of a
main-study packet (task t8, agent DeepSeek, condition Q = Shenzhen); the text before it equals the
template, and the card rubric is elided.
Prompt for Acquisition Request Evaluation (English translation)
You are reading a batch of **evidence-gathering requests**. Each one is a single search or fetch action
issued during some research process,
You see only what this action itself says: the search terms, the title or URL of the page being opened, and
the intent stated in the request.
You **cannot see** what this request retrieved, nor what happened after it. Do not speculate, do not fill in
from imagination.
Below you will be given one or more "user factors". Each factor has two mutually exclusive endpoints,
called ALPHA and BETA respectively.
For **each request × each factor**, judge which endpoint the information this request points to leans
toward supporting:
ALPHA_ONLY useful only if the ALPHA endpoint holds
BETA_ONLY useful only if the BETA endpoint holds
BOTH each endpoint has its own explicit cue; the request points to both endpoints at once
NEITHER useful under both endpoints, or useful under neither (general background, procedures,
statutes, survey entry points)
UNKNOWN the direction cannot be told from the request text, or it hits both endpoints at once and the
main purpose of this request cannot be distinguished
Four key points:
1. `NEITHER` and `UNKNOWN` are not the same thing. `NEITHER` means "seen clearly, it does
not lean toward either endpoint";
`UNKNOWN` means "cannot tell". When you cannot tell, choose `UNKNOWN`; do not use
`NEITHER` as a filler.
28


2. `BOTH` and `NEITHER` are also not the same thing; do not substitute one for the other.
3. When choosing `ALPHA_ONLY` / `BETA_ONLY` / `BOTH`, you must put in `evidence_quote`
a passage
quoted **verbatim from the text of that request**. The quote will be checked by a program against
the original text; any rewording, paraphrase or splicing is voided.
When choosing `NEITHER` or `UNKNOWN`, fill `evidence_quote` with an empty string.
4. Do not use "it can be explained" to rescue a label that has no evidence. No evidence means
`UNKNOWN`.
— Example (unrelated to the present material, only demonstrates the format) —
Factor `demo_piano_use`:
ALPHA endpoint: this piano is for a child who has just started learning to practice on at home; nobody
at home knows how to tune it.
BETA endpoint: this piano is for accompanying rehearsals of a community choir; someone in the choir
can tune it themselves.
Request `demo-u1`: search terms "child beginner upright piano key weighting light/heavy small hands"
→ALPHA_ONLY, quote "child beginner"
Request `demo-u2`: search terms "upright piano action tuning wrench do it yourself tutorial"
→BETA_ONLY, quote "do it yourself"
Request `demo-u3`: search terms "upright piano and grand piano structural differences"
→NEITHER, quote empty
Request `demo-u4`: open page "Used piano trading platform home page"
→UNKNOWN, quote empty
— End of example —
Output only a single JSON object; do not output any other text, and do not use a code fence:
{{"packet_id": "<copy back verbatim the packet_id given below>",
"items": [{{"unit_id": "<copy back verbatim>", "factor_id": "<copy back verbatim>",
"support": "<one of the five values above>", "evidence_quote": "<verbatim quote or empty
string>"}}]}}
`items` must cover every combination of "each request × each factor"; not a single combination may be
missing, and there may be no extra ones.
The object must not contain any keys other than those listed above.
Present material
packet_id: {packet_id}
[Original task text]
{task_text}
[User factors and endpoints]
{factor_block}
[Requests in this packet, {n_units} in total]
{unit_block}
Prompt for Acquisition Request Evaluation: filled materials (read 1, ALPHA = P = Hangzhou)
packet_id: pa3a34b17c980e7b3052f9
[Original task text]
I want to be promoted to a management position at my company in the future. I have experience independently leading projects, but I feel
I lack experience in team communication and task coordination. I want to learn how to systematically improve my leadership and
management abilities, especially in communication and coordination, motivating a team, and decision-making. Please help me plan a
concrete learning path, recommend some suitable books, online courses or training, and tell me which practical opportunities, at work or
outside work, I should focus on seizing to train these abilities.
[User factors and endpoints]
Factor `t8_f1` (type: FACTUAL_STATE; scope: ITEM)
ALPHA endpoint: I currently live in Hangzhou, renting a studio apartment in the city, fairly close to my company.
BETA endpoint: I currently live in Shenzhen, renting a studio apartment in the city, fairly close to my company.
Reading rules:
[...]
Cases to judge as UNKNOWN:
[...]
[Requests in this packet, 12 in total]
[u84bde85db9922055b741] technical background transitioning to manager leadership improvement book recommendations
[ue13871bf8116c3a03fa3] newly promoted technical manager communication coordination motivating team systematic learning path
[u66e5a3e9f46ad83d6739] Shenzhen management training leadership courses online course recommendations
29


[ub6220489eb4d549fd71a] "What Got You Here Won't Get You There" and also Crucial Conversations Crucial Conversations
communication
[ue4ee10ac1a899ce87f15] Coursera leadership course University of Michigan Leading People and Teams recommendation
[ubd838df2c1245bbb41b5] technical manager 1-on-1 delegation decision-making deliberate practice practice opportunities internal
promotion
[ue07be405d69511367726] https://www.cnblogs.com/binyue/p/11710632.html
[u73fafb5ba6c481130e22] https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/354800029
[u73f012c1d46ed8c80584] https://www.coursera.org/specializations/leading-teams
[uf84b036b7bf69858135d] Crucial Conversations Crucial Conversations difficult conversations Chinese edition communication skills
[u1cb7d0ea4fb103977eba] decision-making books "Thinking, Fast and Slow" decision traps managers judgment
[ua419308779bc71de1235] Toastmasters Shenzhen speech club practicing communication leadership
Raw response, read 1 (ALPHA = P = Hangzhou; eight non-directional items elided)
{"packet_id": "pa3a34b17c980e7b3052f9",
"items": [{"unit_id": "u84bde85db9922055b741", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support":
"NEITHER", "evidence_quote": ""},
[...]
{"unit_id": "u66e5a3e9f46ad83d6739", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support": "BETA_
ONLY", "evidence_quote": "Shenzhen"},
[...]
{"unit_id": "ue07be405d69511367726", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support":
"UNKNOWN", "evidence_quote": ""},
[...]
{"unit_id": "ua419308779bc71de1235", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support": "BETA_
ONLY", "evidence_quote": "Shenzhen"}]}
Raw response, read 2 (mirrored packet, ALPHA = Q = Shenzhen; ten non-directional items elided)
{"packet_id": "pabff27c68fc37a3966ad3", "items": [[...], {"unit_id":
"u66e5a3e9f46ad83d6739", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support": "ALPHA_ONLY", "evidence_
quote": "Shenzhen management training leadership courses online course recommendations"},
[...], {"unit_id": "ua419308779bc71de1235", "factor_id": "t8_f1", "support": "ALPHA_
ONLY", "evidence_quote": "Toastmasters Shenzhen speech club practicing communication
leadership"}]}
The two Shenzhen requests are BETA ONLY in read 1 and ALPHA ONLY in read 2, and both restore
to Q ONLY; the two URL requests are UNKNOWN and the other eight NEITHER in both reads. The
reads quote different spans, which is allowed because each quote is a substring of its request.
Validation.
A response must decode to an object with an items list; other envelope devia-
tions are only logged.
Each item needs exactly the keys unit id, factor id, support,
evidence quote and must name a request and factor of the packet; later duplicates are ig-
nored. A request–factor cell is VOID if no valid item covers it, if its label is not one of the five, if
a non-empty quote is not a substring of the request, or if a directional label has an empty quote;
an unreadable response voids every cell of its packet. VOID is neither NEITHER nor zero. In one
main-study cell (t29, GPT, condition P), read 1 quoted a decoded Chinese title for a percent-encoded
URL, so the cell is VOID and the request stays unidentified although read 2 labelled it BOTH.
C.4
WORKSPACE AND FINAL-REPORT ITEM EXTRACTION
Documents and prompt provenance.
Every spontaneous workspace version (artifact kind
= WORKSPACE VERSION, is spontaneous workspace write = True, non-empty) and
the delivered final text are read; identical texts are read once and mapped to all their roles. The
text is split at blank lines and numbered [p001], [p002], ... without changing a character;
a text above 300,000 bytes or 120,000 characters would not be sent and would stay UNKNOWN
(none in the main study). The system text and item instruction were copied from the logged calls
of the exploratory study; relabel slots only renames the slots P/Q and P SIDE/Q SIDE to
ALPHA/BETA and ALPHA SIDE/BETA SIDE. Of the exploratory study’s two versions, which differ
only in the item limit (12, later 30), the 30-item version is used. The four fields in braces are the slots
of build prompt; filling them with the instance values reproduces the sent prompt byte for byte.
Table 14 gives the output schema.
30


Prompt for Workspace and Final-Report Item Extraction (English translation)
You are an evidence annotator for public trajectories, not a quality judge, and you are not responsible for
judging "whether there is user control".
Output observable behavior only according to the actual source text in this packet and the given rubric; do
not read private reasoning, and do not use external common knowledge to fill in facts.
The Task and the two anonymous user conditions ALPHA/BETA are context; which arm the actual run
belongs to is not provided.
source_id may only use IDs provided in this packet, and the program retrieves the source text; generating
nonexistent IDs is forbidden.
That a source was written by the Actor does not mean every sentence in it is a new Actor decision. User
restatements, third-party quotations, and headings must be kept separate from actions.
Searching/having viewed/comparing/recommending/deciding/implementing are not the same level;
"prioritize" must not be changed into "exclude".
The ALPHA/BETA sides may coexist, or one side may contain the other; do not artificially construct an
opposition.
When information is insufficient, write UNKNOWN/UNRESOLVED; do not guess just to complete the
table.
Do not be influenced by the patterns this study expects; do not output cross-run conclusions or overall
scores.
Output only one JSON object, with no explanation of any kind outside the code fence.
Materials for this request
packet_id: {packet_id}
[Task]
{task_text}
[Focal axis and rubric]
{factor_blocks}
[Document to read (one complete draft written by the Actor, numbered by paragraph)]
{numbered_document}
Point out, item by item, the behaviors/plans in this document that are genuinely directed at the user and
related to the focal axis above (list all of them one by one in document order, at most 30 items; do not list
content unrelated to the focal axis, and do not list items just to pad the count). For each item give:
entity_key (name + explicit specification/city/time), axis_id, status∈{MAIN,BACKUP,COMPARE,
EXPLICIT_REJECT,MENTION_ONLY,DEFERRED,UNKNOWN},
side∈{ALPHA_SIDE,BETA_SIDE,BOTH,NEITHER,UNKNOWN} (which side’s rubric this item’s
content falls under),
kind∈{ACTOR_ADVICE,USER_RESTATEMENT,THIRD_PARTY_OR_BACKGROUND},
condition_status∈{EXPLICIT_NONE,EXPLICIT_CONDITION,UNDETERMINED}, condition,
exception, explicit_priority, actual_time_or_budget (fill in only if present in the source text, otherwise an
empty string), source_ids (paragraph numbers).
Clearly distinguish restatements of the user profile from new advice; headings only delimit scope and
cannot create actions on their own.
When content from both sides appears in the same text, do not judge primary vs. secondary by word count;
table order does not automatically equal priority.
Regarding commitment strength, do not change may/preferably into must/only. If there is no focus-related
content at all, output an empty list.
Output
only
one
JSON
object:
{"items":[{"entity_key":"","axis_id":"","status":"MAIN","side":
"UNKNOWN","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":"UNDETERMINED","condition":"",
"exception":"","explicit_priority":"","actual_time_or_budget":"","source_ids":["p001"]}]}
The filled instance is the final report of the same run, read 1; its task text and unknown cases equal
those of the request packet and are elided.
Prompt for Workspace and Final-Report Item Extraction: filled materials (read 1, ALPHA = Q = Shenzhen)
packet_id: di210ac5bc988b487fcc81
[Task]
[...]
[Focal axis and rubric]
Focal axis `t8_f1` (type: FACTUAL_STATE; scope: ITEM)
ALPHA end: I currently live in Shenzhen, where I rent a studio apartment in the city, fairly close to my company.
31


Table 14: Item schema of the extraction output. A response is {"items":
[...]}; a copied
packet id is tolerated. The last column states whether the frozen primary aggregation reads the
field.
Field
Allowed values (checked at ingest)
Use in the decision
axis id
a factor id of the packet
groups items by factor
kind
ACTOR ADVICE, USER RESTATEMENT,
THIRD PARTY OR BACKGROUND
only ACTOR ADVICE counts;
restatements set the basis
status
MAIN, BACKUP, COMPARE, EXPLICIT REJECT,
MENTION ONLY, DEFERRED, UNKNOWN
only MAIN counts
side
ALPHA SIDE, BETA SIDE, BOTH, NEITHER,
UNKNOWN
restored to P SIDE/Q SIDE;
BOTH counts for both
source ids,
entity key,
condition
status
existing paragraph ids (non-empty list); non-empty
string; EXPLICIT NONE,
EXPLICIT CONDITION, UNDETERMINED
validation only
free text
condition, exception,
explicit priority,
actual time or budget
not used
BETA end: I currently live in Hangzhou, where I rent a studio apartment in the city, fairly close to my company.
Interpretation rules:
The reader lists, item by item, the suggestions in the draft related to "in which city to attend offline activities", and judges each item
separately.
A suggestion is judged BETA end if it recommends an offline object or arrangement located in Hangzhou (or a district or county
under Hangzhou) that requires attending in person, i.e. training classes, workshops, in-person business school courses, speech or
communication clubs, offline communities or industry events, volunteer organizations, etc. that the draft states are in Hangzhou, or if it
explicitly arranges offline practice on the basis of living in Hangzhou (e.g. "locally in Hangzhou you can attend...").
A suggestion is judged ALPHA end: same as above, with the object or arrangement located in Shenzhen (or a district under
Shenzhen), or explicitly arranging offline practice on the basis of living in Shenzhen.
A suggestion that gives parallel options in both Hangzhou and Shenzhen (e.g. "in Hangzhou you can..., in Shenzhen you can...") is
judged BOTH.
Judge NEITHER: general advice applicable to both ends, namely books, online courses, online bootcamps, practice opportunities
inside the company, offline advice that does not state a location (e.g., "find a speaking club in your city"), and offline targets located in
cities other than Hangzhou and Shenzhen; if the city name appears only in the description of an institution (e.g., where its headquarters is)
while what is recommended is its online course, also judge NEITHER.
Alternatives given under a condition: a conditional sentence that names only one city ("If you are in Hangzhou, you could ...") goes
to the end corresponding to that city; one that names both cities is judged BOTH.
Merely restating where the user lives ("you live in Hangzhou, close to the company") without giving any offline arrangement based
on it does not count as application; treat it as restatement and assign it to neither end.
Cases judged UNKNOWN:
[...]
[Document to read (a complete manuscript written by the Actor, numbered by paragraph)]
[p001] The research report is complete. Below is a summary of my core conclusions, for your quick understanding:
[p002] ## Core insights
[p003] The key to your transition is not "being unable to learn it", but a **shift in mindset**: from "solving problems yourself" to
"organizing others to solve problems", and from "making the call yourself" to "organizing the team to decide together and buy in". Your
rationality, logic, and professional authority are important assets for leadership, but you need to add two things: "building trust when
facing strangers" and "getting results through others".
[p004] ## Recommended path (12~18 months)
[p005] **Three stages:**
1. **Building the foundation (months 1~3)**: read "High Output Management", "The Leadership Pipeline", and "Becoming a Technical
Leader" to build a mental model of "moving from technology to management"
2. **Targeted breakthroughs (months 3~9)**: tackle the three major weaknesses one by one: communication ("Crucial Conversations",
"Difficult Conversations"), motivation and delegation ("The One Minute Manager", "Work Rules!"), decision-making ("Thinking, Fast
and Slow")
3. **Integration and practice (months 9~18)**: the focus shifts to "doing"
[p006] **Course recommendations (sorted by cost-effectiveness):**
- Coursera University of Michigan "Leading People and Teams" specialization (5 courses, rated 4.7, taken by 190,000 people, precisely
matches your three major weaknesses, suitable for studying in the evening)
- LinkedIn Learning leadership topics (for filling gaps in fragmented time)
- Qigusi "New Managers: Moving from Technology to Management" in-person course (worth investing in later, when you need hands-on
feedback)
[p007] **Practice opportunities (highest cost-effectiveness, zero cost):** proactively mentor interns, volunteer to be the meeting
coordinator, set up 1-on-1s, take part in hiring interviews, apply for cross-department projects: turn your daily work itself into material for
deliberate practice.
[p008] **For your being "introverted with strangers":** joining Shenzhen Toastmasters (low cost, practicing public speaking and
leadership at the same time) is a classic solution.
32


[p009] I have also attached a **30-day starter plan you can put into practice right away** and closed-loop advice of "study in the evening
+ practice during the day" that fits your "night owl" habit.
[p010] Would you like me to expand further on some part (for example, the detailed content of a particular book, or specific Shenzhen
Toastmasters club information)?
Raw response, read 1 (ALPHA = Q = Shenzhen)
{"items":[{"entity_key":"Join Shenzhen Toastmasters (an offline speaking club in Shenzhen,
to practice public speaking and leadership)","axis_id":"t8_f1","status":"MAIN","side":
"ALPHA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":"EXPLICIT_NONE","condition":"",
"exception":"","explicit_priority":"classic solution","actual_time_or_budget":"low cost",
"source_ids":["p008"]},{"entity_key":"Specific Shenzhen Toastmasters club information
(can be expanded)","axis_id":"t8_f1","status":"DEFERRED","side":"ALPHA_SIDE","kind":
"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":"EXPLICIT_NONE","condition":"expand upon user request",
"exception":"","explicit_priority":"","actual_time_or_budget":"","source_ids":["p010"]}]}
Raw response, read 2 (mirrored packet, ALPHA = P = Hangzhou)
{"items":[{"entity_key":"Shenzhen Toastmasters (offline speaking club, Shenzhen)","axis_
id":"t8_f1","status":"MAIN","side":"BETA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":
"EXPLICIT_NONE","condition":"","exception":"","explicit_priority":"classic solution
(low cost)","actual_time_or_budget":"low cost","source_ids":["p008"]},{"entity_key":
"Specific Shenzhen Toastmasters club information (specific information on a Shenzhen
offline target)","axis_id":"t8_f1","status":"DEFERRED","side":"BETA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_
ADVICE","condition_status":"EXPLICIT_CONDITION","condition":"Would you like me to expand
further on some part (for example, the detailed content of a particular book, or specific
Shenzhen Toastmasters club information)","exception":"","explicit_priority":"","actual_
time_or_budget":"","source_ids":["p010"]}]}
Both reads extract the Shenzhen Toastmasters recommendation in [p008] as MAIN, as
ALPHA SIDE in read 1 and BETA SIDE in read 2; both restore to Q SIDE. The offer in [p010]
has status DEFERRED and does not count, and the books and courses in [p005]–[p006] are not
extracted. Each read aggregates to Q LEAN with basis PROGRAM AGGREGATED FROM ITEMS, so
the report is accepted as OWN for this Q-condition run.
Item validation and source links.
Items are validated one by one and an invalid item is dropped
while the others are kept: the key set must be exact, axis id must be a factor of the packet, enumer-
ated fields must hold allowed values, entity key must be non-empty, and every source ids
entry must be a paragraph id of the packet. This establishes that items point to existing paragraphs, not
that the paragraph supports the item or that extraction is exhaustive. Responses are never truncated
(30 or more items are recorded as cap hit), and a decodable response without an items list
contributes no items. In the main study, 86 document packets had at least one dropped item, mostly a
side value in the status field, and 133 reached the limit; e.g. read 1 of the t29 GPT P-condition final
report returned 29 items, dropped 11 with status = NEITHER, and still gave P LEAN, as did
read 2.
C.5
MIRRORED READS AND THE DIRECTIONAL DECISION
No separate direction prompt.
For documents, the direction is not asked of the evaluator: each
read’s items are aggregated by code and the mirrored reads are compared afterwards. A prompt that
asked directly for a factor direction (DOC READ PROMPT, lines 390–492 of the same file) was used
only in the prospective round before the main study, where its reads are a secondary sensitivity; the
main study has no such packet.
Orientation, mirroring, and restoration.
An orientation key that excludes the read index is hashed
with the factor id; the parity of the first byte decides whether P or Q is shown as ALPHA, and read 2
inverts it. Endpoint slots and the slot labels inside the rubric follow the same orientation, so the two
prompts of the example differ only in packet id, slot contents and those labels. Labels are restored
with the packet’s orientation table, a required argument: ALPHA ONLY under ALPHA = Q and
33


BETA ONLY under ALPHA = P both become Q ONLY, while BOTH, NEITHER and UNKNOWN are
unchanged. Each read is restored and aggregated on its own; the two derived values are then checked
for agreement, which is not a vote. The pseudocode below and the pseudocode below gives the
complete decision path.
Pseudocode of the frozen decision path (paraphrase of the code, with function names)
# Paraphrase, not verbatim: one evaluator, factor f, mirrored reads k = 1, 2
# Requests: r2_reader_ingest.ingest_a_read/merge_a_reads; r2_derive_main.pair_d
cell_k(u) = VOID if no valid item, label not allowed, quote not a substring of request u,
or directional label with empty quote; else restored label (P_ONLY, Q_ONLY, ...)
status(u) = UNKNOWN if a cell is VOID; AGREE if cell_1 == cell_2; else DISPUTED
y(run) = (#P_ONLY - #Q_ONLY) / #identified # identified: AGREE and label != UNKNOWN
d_A = (y(P run) - y(Q run)) / 2 # undefined if either y is undefined
state_A = two-bit presence over identified requests (r2_deviation_taxonomy.acq_state)
# Documents: r2_ingest_doc_item.ingest_one/merge; r2_doc_item_restore.aggregate_direction
sel_k = valid items of read k with axis_id == f, kind == ACTOR_ADVICE, status == MAIN
dir_k = BOTH_APPLIED | P_LEAN | Q_LEAN | NO_DIRECTION (presence of restored sides)
basis_k = PROGRAM_AGGREGATED_FROM_ITEMS if sel_k else RESTATEMENT_ONLY or NO_EVIDENCE
# Decision: r3_derive.doc_direction, doc_state; r2_deviation_taxonomy.doc_state
no document for the role -> NO_DOCUMENT
a read missing or undecodable -> UNKNOWN
dir_1 != dir_2 or basis_1 != basis_2 -> UNKNOWN
basis != PROGRAM_AGGREGATED_FROM_ITEMS -> UNKNOWN (no qualifying main advice)
otherwise -> OWN_ONLY | OTHER_ONLY | BOTH | NONE (dir_1 relative to the assigned side)
d_F = (code(P run) - code(Q run)) / 2
code: P_LEAN 1, Q_LEAN -1, BOTH_APPLIED 0, NO_DIRECTION 0
Table 15: Missing and non-directional categories in the frozen code. The table gives handling
rules only; archived population counts are omitted in this version.
Category
Frozen handling
No request
No request packet; request readout undefined and retained as a missing behavioral
state, not zero.
No identified request
Request readout undefined; not imputed as neutral.
No document for a role
Missing document recorded explicitly; not converted to NONE.
No qualifying main
advice
UNKNOWN; NONE is reserved for extracted main advice that expresses neither
endpoint.
Disputed reads
Different labels or evidentiary bases become UNKNOWN.
Unreadable response
Failed read remains missing; no semantic repair or choice between attempts.
Over-long document
Not sent to the evaluator and therefore unresolved.
Censored run
Existing artifacts remain readable; missing artifacts remain absent with the terminal
reason.
No observable behavior
No packet is created; the pair is not point-readable from that channel.
Auxiliary and exploratory evaluators.
The auxiliary evaluators read the same packet files (the
payload hash is stored with every read) with the same prompts, orientations, validation and aggrega-
tion, and produce their own labels (Table 16); these are compared with the primary labels, not pooled,
voted on, or used to fill primary UNKNOWN labels. Two auxiliary document reads in the main study
had an opening code fence without a closing one; under the frozen rule they were not repaired, and
those labels are UNKNOWN. One of them is claude-sonnet-5’s read 2 of the example report above, so
that evaluator’s label for it is UNKNOWN although its read 1 gives Q LEAN; both gpt-5.4 reads give
Q LEAN.
Table 16: Evaluator variants. Only differences from the primary evaluator are listed.
Primary
Auxiliary
Exploratory study
Model
deepseek-flash, provider API
gpt-5.4, claude-sonnet-5 via
a local gateway; served
identity not verified
deepseek-v4.1-flash, hosted
plan of another provider
Settings
thinking disabled, zero
reasoning tokens checked
per call; one user message;
max tokens 16384
provider-default reasoning,
not recorded; otherwise
same; timeout 900 s, not
600 s
thinking disabled; system
and user message;
max tokens 8192
34


Primary
Auxiliary
Exploratory study
Prompts
A READ PROMPT; item
extraction
same packets
requests: batched events
with three preceding
requests as context, field
mentioned side;
documents: same item text
with P/Q slots, task-level
axes, limit 12 then 30
Two reads
orientation by hash, inverted
in read 2; label only if both
agree
same packets and rule, own
labels
read 2 swaps conditions and
side definitions; each read
analyzed separately,
agreement as sensitivity
Coverage
main-study packets
selected main-study packets
exploratory packets
D
HUMAN REVIEW MATERIALS AND RESULTS
People reviewed the study at two separate points, and the two reviews certify different objects. The
construction review asked whether a candidate pair of user conditions is fit to serve as a treatment;
the directional review asked whether a person reading raw agent output recovers the direction the
evaluator read. The reviews differ in reviewers, items, options and decision rules, so we report
them separately and never combine them into one “human accuracy”. Neither has an answer key
independent of human judgment: every figure below is an agreement count. Table 17 lists every
human review we located.
Table 17: Human reviews located in the archive. Items are the units a reviewer answered;
“Recovered” counts answer records present and hash-checked. Source and experiment status are
recorded separately.
Review
Object and reviewers
Items Recovered Source
Experiment
Construction
review
Candidate P/Q cards; CR1,
CR2; 5 criteria
94
94 × 2
RAW
RECOVERED
COMPLETED
Construction pilot
Four fictitious task fixtures;
PR1, PR2; 7 questions each
28
28 × 2
RAW
RECOVERED
COMPLETED
(diagnostic)
Real-task
certification
Planned real-task questionnaire;
marked do-not-send
–
–
DESIGN
ONLY
NOT RUN
Directional audit
Exploratory-study outputs; R1,
R2, and ADJ on disagreements
13
13 × 2 + 6
RAW
RECOVERED
COMPLETED
Counts here are those of the located records; we did not locate answer records of further reviewers
or rounds, and the files do not record the reviewers’ education, compensation or consent procedure.
We keep three archive layers apart. Documented protocol: criteria, decision rules, and the exact
audit pages shown to reviewers. Recovered item-level material: every answer record in Table 17,
with hashes equal to the freeze manifest or lock ledger (one reviewer’s audit sheets were pasted as
text and then written verbatim; the others are byte copies), and all 13 audit packets. Not located:
the construction page actually served, and any data, definition or denominator behind a per-class
human-agreement summary in earlier drafts (about 100% for one-sided labels, 86% for BOTH, 13.3%
for NONE), which is therefore not used. The recovered early review does not cover outputs of the
later main cross-model study, follow-ups, or harness comparison; it is not evidence for the expanded
human accounting.
D.1
CONSTRUCTION REVIEW OF USER-FACTOR CANDIDATES
Place in the pipeline and procedure.
Model proposers generated candidate factors from PDR-
Bench user profiles (120 planned proposal calls, 108 candidates). Each candidate became a card with
a source-grounded endpoint A and a counterfactual endpoint B; two automated verifiers admitted
94 cards, and the other 14 were never shown to people. Two reviewers each judged all 94 cards
on five criteria, with the options “yes”, “no” and “cannot tell”. A card showed the source field and
value, the exact span, A, B and the facts held fixed, but not the changed dimension or any automatic
35


verdict. After review, a fixed-seed mechanical rule selected 12 approved cards; the 10 factors of the
initial randomized study come from these 12 (Appendix A). For the main cross-model study and its
follow-ups, the project’s methods record lists AI agents as card writers and reviewers; we located
no human construction review for factors other than this batch. The wording below is the frozen
protocol (fingerprint 4d56ee0c1c76e080, page schema v3); the exported answers carry schema
v4, and the page actually served was not located, so we cannot confirm that the served wording was
byte-identical.
Protocol for Construction Review: Five Criteria per Card (English translation)
H1 Does situation A faithfully express the core meaning of the source material?
Natural rewording, synonymous expression and reasonable concretization are allowed. Choose “No”
only when A clearly adds important new facts, preferences or constraints that the source material does not
support.
[Yes / No / Cannot tell]
H2 Do A and B still center on the same core factor, only in a different direction or at a different level?
B should only replace the core factor stated in A with a different situation; it must not replace it with a
different matter.
[Yes / No / Cannot tell]
H3 Does going from A to B mainly change only one core factor?
Natural descriptive changes brought about by the same core factor are acceptable. Choose “No” only
when two or more mutually independent factors are clearly changed at the same time.
[Yes / No / Cannot tell]
H4 Is the difference between A and B clear enough, while B is also a user situation that is understandable
and could plausibly occur in reality?
B is not required to be common, only not obviously absurd, self-contradictory, or treating the cost
itself as the goal.
[Yes / No / Cannot tell]
H5 Neither A nor B states in advance the specific product, plan or answer that should be chosen in the
future task, correct?
General examples that appear in the source material to illustrate a preference do not count as giving
the answer in advance. Choose “No” only when it explicitly specifies which specific product, plan or
answer the future task should choose.
[Yes / No / Cannot tell]
(translation) H1 A faithful to the source; H2 A and B concern the same core factor; H3 only one core
factor changes; H4 the difference is clear and B is a possible user situation; H5 neither states the answer
the future task should choose. Options: yes / no / cannot tell.
Decision rule.
A card is approved only if both reviewers pass all five criteria; any disagreement,
“no” or “cannot tell” excludes it (HUMAN AMBIGUOUS EXCLUDED V1), which the rule defines as a
selective abstention, not a finding of invalidity. This rule (A HUMAN DECISION RULE v2) replaced
a planned third-reviewer adjudication of all disagreements after both answer sets were in, but before
the blinding key was opened and before any downstream run; no adjudication was performed.
Table 18: Construction review: answers per criterion (94 cards). Counts are yes / no / cannot
tell. Agreement is the share of cards with equal answers; kappa is undefined for H4 because neither
reviewer varied. Descriptive only.
Criterion
CR1
CR2
Agreement
Kappa
H1 faithful to source
69 / 24 / 1
94 / 0 / 0
0.7340
0.0000
H2 same core factor
67 / 27 / 0
94 / 0 / 0
0.7128
0.0000
H3 one factor changed
51 / 43 / 0
93 / 1 / 0
0.5532
0.0252
H4 clear and plausible
94 / 0 / 0
94 / 0 / 0
1.0000
undefined
H5 no answer leakage
88 / 6 / 0
93 / 1 / 0
0.9255
−0.0186
All five passed (cards)
39
92
0.4149 (all five equal)
–
Outcome, four categories kept apart.
Passed: 39 of 94 cards passed all five criteria for both
reviewers. Failed: of the 55 excluded cards, 53 were not passed by CR1 while CR2 passed all five
criteria, and 2 were failed by both; CR2 failed no card that CR1 passed, so the approved set equals
36


CR1’s own all-pass set. Cannot tell: one answer in 940 (CR1, H1, on a card CR1 also failed on H2
and H3). Not selected: 14 candidates stopped by the verifiers before review, and 27 approved cards
not chosen by the down-selection. With CR2 passing 92 of 94 cards and kappa near zero on every
criterion, this step worked as a single-reviewer screen with a near-constant second review, not as a
two-reviewer consensus. Figure 11 shows two real cards from one source span.
Construction Review: Two Cards from One Source Span
ñ
Source (PDR-Bench profile PDR_PERSONA_010, field Financial information.Financial situa-
tion.Liabilities): Has a mortgage, no other major liabilities, plans to pay off the mortgage early
within five years.
Endpoint A on both cards repeats this span verbatim.
Card 32267733 – excluded
B: Has a mortgage, no other major
liabilities, does not plan to prepay, plans to
repay normally over the original loan term
(e.g., twenty or thirty years).
  CR1: H1 § H2 § H3 § H4 § H5 Ý
  CR2: H1 § H2 § H3 § H4 § H5 §
Ý Rule: one “no” ⇒excluded (CR1 alone)
Card a167fde5 – approved, not selected
B: Has a mortgage, no other major
liabilities, repays the mortgage on the
normal repayment schedule and does not
plan to pay it off early.
  CR1: H1 § H2 § H3 § H4 § H5 §
note: That depends on how much is in the
housing provident fund
  CR2: H1 § H2 § H3 § H4 § H5 §
§ Rule: approved; ® not among the 12
selected
Figure 11: Construction review example. Two cards for the same factor type, built by different
proposers, differ only in the wording of B; CR1 judged the first to leak an answer (H5), CR2 passed
both. The note (“that depends on how much housing provident fund there is”, translation) is the only
free-text note in the 188 answer records. § = yes, Ý = no.
Construction pilot on task relations.
A separate pilot asked whether two people without project
background could read three local relations of a task from minimal fields: which attribute each
endpoint matches, the preferred direction, and whether the attributes bear on the candidates and
on one final choice. The four tasks were fictitious fixtures, one clean and three with one planted
defect each, and the decision rule was frozen before any answers. Both reviewers answered all 28
questions (Table 19); after the private blinding key maps both sheets to the same relations, their
statuses coincide on 19 of 28. The frozen rule returned “needs PI” on every fixture and the pilot
was closed as diagnostic, not as validation: both reviewers found the mapping defect, one found the
polarity defect, neither found the binding defect, both reported a break on the clean fixture, and each
gave one fixed answer to the shared-choice question on all four fixtures. The certification of real tasks
that was to follow was never sent.
Table 19: Construction pilot: relation statuses (PR1 mark first, PR2 second; § = reported intact,
Ý = reported broken). Relation families: R1 endpoint→attribute, R2 preferred direction, R3a attribute
bears on candidates, R3b one shared final choice; src/cf = source or counterfactual side. Planted
defects: fixture 2 polarity (R2), 3 binding (R3), 4 mapping (R1).
Fixture
R1 src
R1 cf
R2 src
R2 cf
R3a src
R3a cf
R3b
Same
1 clean
§§
Ý§
§§
§§
Ý§
Ý§
§Ý
3/7
2 polarity defect
§§
§§
Ý§
§§
§§
§§
§Ý
5/7
3 binding defect
Ý§
§§
§§
§§
§§
§§
§Ý
5/7
4 mapping defect
ÝÝ
ÝÝ
§§
§§
§§
§§
§Ý
6/7
37


D.2
DIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENT REVIEW (EARLY AUDIT)
Items.
This audit asked whether people recover, from the same raw material, the direction the
evaluator read, using the exploratory study’s corpus and evaluator (deepseek-v4.1-flash, two mirrored
readings). An item is one run, one factor axis and one view: acquisition requests (A), first public
draft (W) or final report (F). Thirteen items from two tasks were fixed before any human answer:
the four acquisition items the evaluator labeled, and nine items whose label a coverage check had
withheld (output UNKNOWN, gap SOURCE SCAN INCOMPLETE) although both readings agreed.
The items target load-bearing cells and are not a random sample. The five options correspond to the
paper’s readouts: P, Q, MIXED (both), NEUTRAL (neither), UNKNOWN (abstention).
Stages.
In stage 1 each principal reviewer answered the 13 items in two sessions (7 and 6 items) with
one label and one to three evidence identifiers; each sheet was locked by sha256 before stage 2, which
showed each reviewer, for the nine gated items, their own answer and the passages the extraction had
flagged. Reviewers never saw each other’s answers, the evaluator’s labels or the run’s condition. The
third reviewer answered both stages only for the union of the principals’ disagreements (5 at stage 1,
1 more at stage 2), without being told why. Some items showed P and Q in swapped order; all labels
below are mapped back to the canonical orientation.
Protocol for Directional Review: Reviewer Instructions (English translation)
Stage 1 (session page header):
7 questions in total, expected to take about 20 minutes. Please first fill in your ID:
You do not need to know the project background. Each question has two anonymous user requirements
(P and Q) and a passage of source text showing the behavior an AI assistant actually produced. Please
judge only whether the behavior in the source text leans more toward P, leans more toward Q, leans toward
neither, has both, or has insufficient information. “Insufficient information (cannot judge)” is a completely
normal answer; you do not need to try your best to guess. Then just select 1 to 3 evidence IDs that support
your judgment; you do not need to copy the original sentences.
Meaning of the five options
Leans more toward requirement P / Q: the actually observable behavior in the source text fits that require-
ment better.
No direction (neutral): the behavior is already specific enough, but clearly has no leaning on the “P or Q”
dimension.
Both (mixed): the source text clearly contains both content leaning toward P and content leaning toward Q,
and it is impossible to tell which is primary.
Insufficient information (cannot judge): the source text does not have enough information, the behavior is
not described specifically, the evidence is mutually contradictory, or it cannot be judged reliably.
Note: “neutral” and “cannot judge” are two different things—the former means you saw clearly and there
is indeed no direction; the latter means you cannot see clearly.
Some letters that will appear: P and Q are the two anonymous user requirements; evidence IDs look like
u001; if A, W and F appear in the judging criteria, they refer respectively to the AI assistant’s three stages
of “searching for information”, “writing drafts” and “final delivery”.
[...] (items follow: task, view, P, Q, question, rubric, numbered evidence)
Stage 2 (personal page):
Your stage-1 answer sheets for both sessions have been recorded and locked and will not be modified. Each
item below asks only one small question: for the material now revealed as “uncertain”, is there a reasonable
interpretation under which your own stage-1 direction judgment no longer holds? Three options: No /
Possibly / Uncertain. Please also answer as usual for items where you answered “insufficient information”
in stage 1.
You are now told: the following source passages (which you already read in stage 1) were flagged as
“uncertain” during the automatic extraction stage. Please judge: knowing this, is there a reasonable
interpretation of these passages under which your stage-1 direction judgment on this item no longer holds?
Your judgment (choose only one) No—this content is not enough to change my stage-1 judgment
Possibly—this content admits an equally reasonable interpretation that could overturn my stage-1 judgment
Uncertain
(translation, abridged) Judge whether the behavior leans to P, to Q, to neither, contains both, or cannot be
told (a normal answer); cite one to three evidence ids. Stage 2: given that these passages were flagged as
uncertain, could they overturn your direction? No / possibly / unsure.
38


Table 20: Directional audit: all 13 items (canonical orientation). Instrument: two readings before
the coverage check →output. Stage 2 (R1/R2, gated items): no = cannot overturn, may = could
overturn. ADJ: third reviewer (stage-2 answer). Final: frozen final label. Shading: R1 and R2 agree
(green), differ with one UNKNOWN (yellow), differ otherwise (red). D05: career plan, open to other
cities vs. local only; D02: business trip, culture vs. food.
Item
Packet
Axis · view
Instrument
R1
R2
Stage 2
ADJ
Final
A1
ccdb4cfa
D05.G1 · F
P, P →UNK
P
P
no/no
–
P
A2
d707606e
D05.G1 · F
P, P →UNK
P
P
may/no
Q (no)
P
A3
51f1e541
D05.G1 · A
Q, Q →Q
Q
Q
–
–
Q
A4
2b08dccd
D05.G1 · A
P, P →P
P
P
–
–
P
A5
17a324cc
D05.G1 · A
P, P →P
P
P
–
–
P
A6
86efaf6a
D05.G1 · F
Q, Q →UNK
Q
Q
no/no
–
Q
A7
6d9a6895
D05.G1 · A
Q, Q →Q
Q
Q
–
–
Q
B1
4f5ccde7
D05.G3 · W
P, P →UNK
UNK
P
may/no
P (no)
P
B2
841affd5
D02.L3 · A
NEU, NEU →UNK
UNK
MIX
no/may
MIX (no)
MIX
B3
1e96a76d
D05.G1 · W
P, P →UNK
UNK
P
may/no
Q (no)
Q
B4
70a798aa
D02.L1 · F
P, P →UNK
P
P
no/no
–
P
B5
b057963f
D05.G3 · F
P, P →UNK
UNK
P
may/no
P (no)
P
B6
f19582fa
D02.L3 · A
P, P →UNK
P
MIX
may/no
P (may)
P
Results against the main text.
These records reproduce the figures in Sections 4.2 and 5.5. The
principal reviewers gave the same label on 8 of 13 items (7 of 7 in the first session, 1 of 6 in the
second). None of their five disagreements is an opposite direction: in four R1 answered UNKNOWN,
and in one R1 answered P and R2 MIXED. Both match all four accepted instrument labels (4/4 each).
On the nine gated items, the evaluator’s agreed reading before the check equals the final human label
on 7; the exceptions are B2 (NEUTRAL versus MIXED) and B3, whose final label is the adjudicator’s
Q against R2’s and the evaluator’s P. Where both agreed at stage 1 and answered stage 2 (four items),
their stage-2 answers agree on 3. Both principals read a direction and both answered “no” at stage 2
on 3 of the 9 gated items (5 of 9 when any two of the three reviewers give the same direction and
both answer “no”); on these items the evaluator’s pre-check reading equals that direction (3/3 and
5/5). The adjudicator read the opposite direction on A2 and B3 (one run), the only opposite readings
among the human answers. The closure file labels these gate counts “a post-selection sample, not
accuracy” (translation).
39


Accepted and Agreed (Item A4)
✓
Task D05 (exploratory study), axis D05.G1, view A (search requests); run in condition P.
P: I do not restrict my work city; as long as the position is suitable, I am willing to go to places
like Beijing, Hangzhou, or Shenzhen, and I can relocate.
Q: I plan to keep developing my career in Shanghai; for this transition I am only considering
local positions in Shanghai, not positions in other cities.
Question: How is the geographic scope of the positions/companies actually searched for,
considered, or screened restricted or expanded?
Material shown (verbatim, all four passages)
u001 search: {"query": "2026 AI product manager hiring Beijing Shanghai Hangzhou Shenzhen job demand"}
u002 search: {"query": "Shanghai Beijing Hangzhou Shenzhen AI product manager target companies ByteDance
Tencent Alibaba 2026 hiring"}
u003 search: {"query": "2026 AI product manager companies hiring Shanghai Beijing Shenzhen Hangzhou"}
u004 search: {"query": "2026 AI product manager companies ByteDance Alibaba Tencent Baidu Meituan Pinduoduo
Xiaohongshu hiring Shanghai Beijing Hangzhou Shenzhen"}
Independent human answers
  R1: P (u001 u002 u004)
  R2: P (u001 u002 u004); note: all
searches list Shanghai/Beijing/Hangzhou/
Shenzhen side by side; the geographic
scope is open.
8 ADJ: not assigned; stage 2 not asked
Instrument and recorded outcome
Æ Readings P, P →output P
§ Instrument label = both reviewers’ label
À Final human label: P
Source: packet REV-2b08dccdc5f9 (stage 1 file 05); answer sheets: lock-ledger lines 1 and 3. Shows: an accepted label both reviewers
recover from the requests alone.
40


Opposite Readings of One Final Report (Item A2)
p
Task D05, axis D05.G1, view F (final report); run in canonical condition P. P and Q were
swapped on this page (canonical label in brackets).
Page P [canonical Q]: I plan to keep developing my career in Shanghai; for this transition I
am only considering local positions in Shanghai, not positions in other cities.
Page Q [canonical P]: I do not restrict my work city; as long as the position is suitable, I am
willing to go to places like Beijing, Hangzhou, or Shenzhen, and I can relocate.
Material shown (verbatim; Markdown rule rows elided [...]; u002 and u003 flagged for
stage 2)
u001 # Data Analyst →AI Product Manager: 6-Month Transition Learning Plan
u002 | Company | City | Why it suits you | Typical positions | [...]
| **ByteDance** | Beijing/Shanghai/Shenzhen | Extremely strong data-driven culture; AI strategy PM roles heavily need a
data analysis background | AI strategy PM, AI product PM (consumer-facing), AI data platform PM |
| **Tencent** | Shenzhen/Beijing/Shanghai | Yuanbao AI and CSIG cloud intelligence are expanding hiring, with dedicated
AI evaluation positions | Large-model evaluation PM, Yuanbao AI strategy PM |
| **Meituan** | Beijing/Shanghai | Recommendation strategy direction; data-driven decision-making is the core | AI
product manager (consumer healthcare), recommendation strategy PM |
| **Kuaishou** | Beijing/Hangzhou | Content understanding and recommendation system direction | AI strategy product
manager |
u003 | Company | City | Typical positions | [...]
| **Alibaba** | Hangzhou/Beijing/Shanghai | Alibaba Cloud Intelligence AI OS strategy PM, merchant AI product manager
|
| **Baidu** | Beijing/Shanghai/Shenzhen | ERNIE Bot (Wenxin Yiyan) AI product manager |
| **Xiaohongshu** | Shanghai/Beijing | AI strategy product manager |
| **Pinduoduo** | Shanghai | Temu internationalization AI direction |
| **Minimax/Zhipu AI/Kimi** | Beijing/Shanghai | AI product manager, Agent product manager |
Independent human answers
  R1: page Q [P] (u002 u003)
  R2: page Q [P] (u002 u003); note: the
candidate company table lists companies
across Beijing/Hangzhou/Shenzhen and
gives “Why it suits you”, with no
Shanghai-restricting wording at all.
8 ADJ (assigned because stage 2 dif-
fered): page P [Q] (u002 u003)
Instrument and recorded outcome
Æ Readings [P], [P] →output UNKNOWN
(coverage check)
² Stage 2: R1 may, R2 no, ADJ no
À Final human label: [P] (stage 1)
§ R1, R2, instrument readings: [P]
Ý ADJ: opposite direction [Q]
® Frozen joint-support rule: slot unknown
Source: packet REV-d707606e86b2 (file 19); frozen adjudication C holds ADJ’s page label P LEAN (= canonical Q).
41


Both or Neither? (Item B2)
,
Task D02 (Berlin trip), axis D02.L3 (leisure bookings), view A; run in condition P.
P: When on business trips, I use my free time to explore the distinctive local culture.
Q:
When on business trips, I use my free time to explore the distinctive local cuisine.
Question: How do explicit leisure ticketing, reservations, extra budget, or preparation tasks
serve a cultural or local-cuisine experience?
Material shown (verbatim, all three passages; u001 and u003 flagged for stage 2)
u001 search: {"query": "Berlin Mitte restaurant recommendations business lunch dinner local specialties 2025"}
u002 search: {"query": "Berlin business lunch restaurants recommendations Mitte price per person 20-30 euros"}
u003 search: {"query": "Berlin Jewish Museum Museum Island tickets price 2026"}
Independent human answers
  R1: UNKNOWN (u001 u002 u003)
  R2: MIXED (u001 u003); note: u003 is
a museum-ticket search (cultural ticketing
preparation); u001 includes a search for
local specialty restaurants (food
preparation); u002 is a business-lunch
price comparison and, per the criteria, is
not counted. Both types are present, with
no discernible primary one.
8 ADJ: MIXED (u001 u002 u003)
Instrument and recorded outcome
Æ Readings NEUTRAL, NEUTRAL →
output UNKNOWN (coverage check)
² Stage 2: R1 no, R2 may, ADJ no
À Final human label: MIXED
Ý Pre-check reading NEUTRAL̸ = final la-
bel MIXED
Source: packet REV-841affd5f159 (file 12). Shows: “neither” and “both” are different readings of the same requests.
E
WORKED MEASUREMENT AND TRAJECTORY EXAMPLES
This appendix follows real records through the measurement procedure of Section 4. Section E.1
traces one pair of runs from the main study from the user input to the pair comparison, Section E.2
shows single-document states, including cases in which no label is accepted, and Section E.3 shows
boundary cases along trajectories. Unless stated otherwise, every label is a reading of the primary
evaluator (deepseek-flash, two mirrored reads), not a human judgment. Quotations are copied
mechanically from the run records and evaluator outputs and kept in the original Chinese; English
renderings are marked as translations, and [...] marks an elision. Runs are named by task, model
family and arm; full run identifiers, file hashes and locators are listed in the source map of this
appendix. The examples show how the procedure behaves; they are not a sample for estimating how
often a pattern occurs.
E.1
A COMPLETE PAIR FROM THE MAIN STUDY
Selection.
The pair (Figure 12) was first chosen for the analysis of shared research questions by a
rule written after listing candidate pairs by metadata and before any final report was read: primary
main-study pairs with dA = 0, final reports on opposite sides (SEPARATED), and every request
identified by both reads; among these, “one short pair from a factor whose factor-level request
difference is above 0.20”. The last step was a judgment, not a ranking, and reusing the pair here is
a choice made for this appendix, because its records are complete and short enough to show every
step. It is one of the 47 main-study pairs with dA = 0, and one of the 27 among them with a positive
readable final comparison (note to Table 26); it is not a typical run.
Step 1: Inputs.
The task is PDR-Bench task 23 with persona User11. The factor card takes the
persona field Basic Attributes.Long-term Spatial Features.Place of Residence (long-term residence),
whose source value is Hangzhou; P keeps it and Q substitutes Nanjing. Two background details
that tie the user to Hangzhou (the graduate school and a remark on the city’s internet culture) are
removed from the shared background of both arms, so they are absent from the input rather than
merely unselected. The round’s records state that the card was written by an AI constructor and
42


Deep Research Task (PDR-Bench task 23, Finance; English translation)

Next month I plan to buy my first car, so I need to choose suitable car insurance. I lean
toward a small SUV suited to city use, expect to drive between 800 and 1000 kilometers
per month, and have an annual budget of roughly 3500 to 4500 yuan. To get
comprehensive protection in case of accidents, I would like to add riders such as theft
insurance, own-damage insurance and roadside assistance service, so that I can get help
in time when something unexpected happens.
User condition P (Gemini run)
¹
I am an algorithm engineer, male,
around thirty years old. My
hometown is Wuhan, and both my
parents are still alive. . .
½
I currently live long-term in
Hangzhou, in a rented studio
apartment in the urban area, fairly
close to my company.
Final report (excerpts)
@
. . . mainstream small city gasoline
SUV (e.g., Honda XR-V/Vezel, Geely
Binyue, Volkswagen T-Cross, etc.)
taking out its first policy in Hangzhou
as the example [p015]
. . . paid on your behalf together with
the compulsory traffic insurance
(Hangzhou local tax standard) [p017]
. . . Hangzhou has high per-capita
disposable income and a high density
of luxury cars on the road [p017]
À
Evaluator: P_LEAN, P_LEAN;
accepted P, i.e. OWN
User condition Q (Gemini run)
¹
I am an algorithm engineer, male,
around thirty years old. My
hometown is Wuhan, and both my
parents are still alive. . .
½
I currently live long-term in Nanjing,
in a rented studio apartment in the
urban area, fairly close to my
company.
Final report (excerpts)
@
Taking one newly bought in the
Nanjing area . . . small city gasoline
SUV . . . as the example [p012]
. . . in large and medium-sized cities
such as Nanjing and Wuhan, the
number of luxury cars is large and
the benchmark for personal injury
and death compensation keeps rising
[p014]
. . . commuting daily mainly in Nanjing
for the first 1~2 years [p019]
À
Evaluator: Q_LEAN, Q_LEAN;
accepted Q, i.e. OWN
Figure 12: The worked pair. Main study, task 23, Gemini (gemini-3.8-flash), factor “long-term
residence”. The arms share the task and background (orange) and differ only in the city (Hangzhou
vs. Nanjing). Translation of the task: car-insurance advice for a first car, a small city SUV driven 800–
1000 km per month, annual budget about 3,500–4,500 yuan, with theft, own-damage and roadside
cover. Report excerpts (translation): P, “...taking a first-year policy in Hangzhou as the example”,
“vehicle tax ... Hangzhou local tax standard”, “Hangzhou’s high disposable income and density of
luxury cars”; Q, “taking a new small city SUV bought in the Nanjing area as the example”, “in large
cities such as Nanjing and Wuhan . . . ”, “commuting mainly in Nanjing for the first one to two years”.
Bracketed ids are the evaluator’s paragraph indices.
checked by two AI input reviewers before any run; one reviewer flagged a contradiction, which the
recorded adjudication rejected as a misreading (the sentence about living in Wuhan refers to the
parents). The system message is “You are a research assistant. Please complete the user’s research
task, using the available tools as needed, and submit a research report. You will not receive any new
user replies during this run.” in both arms. The two user messages (task, background and factor
sentence) have 600 characters each and differ only in Hangzhou/Nanjing (characters 575–576). No
further user message is sent.
Step 2: Requests and returns.
Each arm issues three searches (Table 21); arm P then saves
one draft and submits, while arm Q submits without a draft. The draft and submit tools return fixed
acknowledgements, not user feedback. Query e0004 is identical in both arms but returned different
result lists, so an identical request does not imply identical evidence. The request evaluator sees
the task, the anonymized endpoints with the factor rubric and the request strings, not the returns,
the arm, the paired run or the model. All six requests are NEITHER in both reads, each with an
43


empty evidence quote: none names Hangzhou, Nanjing, Zhejiang or Jiangsu, as the rubric requires
for an endpoint label. The first read of the arm-Q requests echoed its packet identifier with three extra
characters; ingestion logged this as an envelope problem (BAD ENUM) and kept the three unit labels.
Table 21: All tool calls of the worked pair. Requests are verbatim; labels are the two mirrored reads,
restored to P/Q. The evaluator reads the request, never its return.
Arm Event Tool
Request or argument
Return
Reads 1 / 2
P
e0002
search
car insurance comprehensive
reform, theft insurance, vehicle
damage insurance, roadside
assistance, value-added services
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
P
e0004
search
PICC, Ping An, China Pacific,
car insurance, roadside
assistance, remote areas, Tibet,
Yunnan, self-drive travel
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
P
e0006
search
new car first-year insurance,
driving habits, parents’ car,
accident-free, discount, NCD
coefficient
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
P
e0008
write report
(content: 5020 chars)
Draft saved.
—
P
e0010
submit report (content: 4991 chars)
Report
submitted.
—
Q
e0002
search
car insurance, premium reform,
vehicle damage insurance,
whole-vehicle theft insurance,
spontaneous combustion, water
wading, third party cannot be
found
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
Q
e0004
search
PICC, Ping An, China Pacific,
car insurance, roadside
assistance, remote areas, Tibet,
Yunnan, self-drive travel
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
Q
e0006
search
new car first-year insurance, no
claims record, PICC, Ping An,
CPIC, price estimate,
150,000-yuan SUV
6 results
NEITHER / NEITHER
Q
e0008
submit report (content: 3426 chars)
Report
submitted.
—
Step 3: Draft and final reports.
Only arm P writes a draft (W1, 5,020 characters); arm Q has
no workspace document, and none is filled in. Both reads of W1 cite p015, which prices the policy
for a first registration in Hangzhou, as main advice for P. Arm P’s final report (4,991 characters)
rewrites the draft: the normalized content-token edit distance is 0.86, and 1 of the 98 draft sentences
is kept verbatim. The direction is unchanged (OWN to OWN), so this is one of the 18 OWN-to-OWN
comparisons with distance of at least 0.5 in Section 5.3. Arm Q’s final report has 3,426 characters.
Draft W1 and final report of arm P: paragraphs cited in Steps 3 and 4 (excerpts; English translation)
[draft W1, event e0008] [p015] Taking as the example a mainstream small city gasoline SUV with an
invoice price of about **100,000 - 130,000 yuan** (e.g., Honda XR-V/Vezel, Geely Binyue, Volkswagen
T-Cross, etc.) insured for the first time in Hangzhou, Zhejiang, the optimal coverage combination is
estimated as follows:
[final report, event e0010]
[p008] [...]
* **Exploitable room for flexibility (independent pricing)**: insurers have an independent pricing
coefficient (the industry range generally floats between 0.5 - 1.5). The insurer’s risk underwriting engine
makes a comprehensive assessment combining the owner’s age (around 30, a stable period), occupational
label (algorithm/IT engineers and other low-claim-rate occupations), and place of residence (Hangzhou’s
low-risk road environment). Through phone direct sales, the insurer’s official website or official app
44


channels, high-quality owners are often given substantial discounts by lowering the discount coefficient or
giving away large fuel packages, maintenance coupons, designated-driver services and the like.
[p021] ### Plan A (ultimate efficiency, urban tech type): China Ping An
* **Suitable scenario**: if in the next year your life will be mainly in Hangzhou and the surrounding
Yangtze River Delta area, and you prefer to handle all procedures with one tap in a mobile app.
[...]
Step 4: Extracted items and mirrored reads.
Each read receives the full report with indexed
paragraphs, the task, the factor rubric and the two anonymized endpoints; for arm P’s report, read
1 presents P as ALPHA and read 2 presents P as BETA. Read 1 returns 14 items for this factor
and read 2 returns 20; two of each are shown verbatim below. The Ping An route for a user living
mainly in Hangzhou (p021) is ALPHA SIDE and MAIN in read 1 but BETA SIDE and BACKUP
in read 2; both sides restore to P. The remark that insurers price by place of residence (p008) is
MENTION ONLY in both reads and does not count. These item-level differences do not change the
result: each read has four main-advice items for P and none for Q.
Raw document-level evaluator outputs for the final report of arm P (2 of 14 and 2 of 20 items)
[read 1: ALPHA = P, BETA = Q]
{"items":[
[...]
{"entity_key":"China Ping An-Plan A suited to activity in Hangzhou and
the Yangtze River Delta","axis_id":"t23_f1","status":"MAIN","side":
"ALPHA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":"EXPLICIT_
CONDITION","condition":"if in the next year your life will be mainly
in Hangzhou and the surrounding Yangtze River Delta area, and you
prefer to handle all procedures with one tap in a mobile app",
"exception":"","explicit_priority":"","actual_time_or_budget":"",
"source_ids":["p021"]}
[...]
{"entity_key":"Independent pricing coefficient-residence Hangzhou
low-risk road environment","axis_id":"t23_f1","status":"MENTION_ONLY",
"side":"ALPHA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_status":
"EXPLICIT_NONE","condition":"","exception":"","explicit_priority":"",
"actual_time_or_budget":"","source_ids":["p008"]}
[...]
]}
[read 2: ALPHA = Q, BETA = P]
{"items":[
[...]
{"entity_key":"Premium estimated taking a 100,000-130,000-yuan small
SUV first insured in Hangzhou as the example","axis_id":"t23_f1",
"status":"MAIN","side":"BETA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE","condition_
status":"EXPLICIT_NONE","condition":"","exception":"","explicit_
priority":"","actual_time_or_budget":"","source_ids":["p015"]}
[...]
{"entity_key":"Plan A China Ping An (condition:
life mainly in
Hangzhou and the surrounding Yangtze River Delta area)","axis_id":
"t23_f1","status":"BACKUP","side":"BETA_SIDE","kind":"ACTOR_ADVICE",
"condition_status":"EXPLICIT_CONDITION","condition":"if in the next
year your life will be mainly in Hangzhou and the surrounding Yangtze
River Delta area, and you prefer to handle all procedures with one tap
in a mobile app","exception":"","explicit_priority":"","actual_time_
or_budget":"","source_ids":["p021"]}
[...]
]}
Step 5: States and pair comparison.
Code, not the evaluator, turns items into states (Table 22).
Each read keeps only main-advice items of the agent’s own advice and is P if a kept item covers P and
none covers Q; two agreeing reads, each with such an item basis, give an accepted label, and anything
45


else is UNKNOWN. With s(P) = 1 and s(Q) = −1, Equation 4 gives dF = (1 −(−1))/2 = 1;
every request in both arms is NEITHER, so dA = 0. The ordered comparisons recorded in arm
P are the requests before the draft (NONE) with the draft (OWN), a joint reading across channels
rather than a propagation, and the draft with the final report (OWN to OWN). These runs have no
provenance graph linking returns to report content, and we draw none; the event order is not an
evidence dependency.
Table 22: From reads to the pair comparison. Directions are restored to P/Q; parentheses count
each read’s main-advice items on this factor (P side / Q side / neither).
Arm Observation Read 1 / read 2
Program decision State
P
3 requests
NEITHER / NEITHER for each request
identified, no side
NONE
P
draft W1
P LEAN (5 / 0 / 0) / P LEAN (6 / 0 / 3)
agree, item basis
OWN
P
final report
P LEAN (4 / 0 / 2) / P LEAN (4 / 0 / 7)
agree, item basis
OWN
Q
3 requests
NEITHER / NEITHER for each request
identified, no side
NONE
Q
draft
—
no document
NO DOCUMENT
Q
final report
Q LEAN (0 / 3 / 0) / Q LEAN (0 / 2 / 0)
agree, item basis
OWN
Pair: requests dA = 0; drafts not compared (arm Q has none); final reports SEPARATED, dF = 1.
E.2
DIRECTIONAL STATES IN SINGLE DOCUMENTS
Table 23 shows one main-study document for each state other than OWN and three kinds of UN-
KNOWN; except for the task-3 row, the documents were chosen for this appendix from the main-study
table of document states, preferring documents in which one or two paragraphs decide the reading.
The two refusals from the same task and model are similar texts with different states: the Q-arm
refusal yields main-advice items tied to neither endpoint (NONE), while the P-arm refusal yields
no items (UNKNOWN). Whether a document is NONE or UNKNOWN thus depends on whether
an item basis is extracted, which is why the two are never merged. The OTHER case is one of
two final reports labelled OTHER in the main study’s document-state table (the other is from an
additional two-factor run); the assigned age appears only in the title, the diagnosis and a backup
product, while the first-choice product is read as matching the other endpoint, and the example does
not settle whether this reflects the agent’s choice or the resolution of the rubric. The task-3 row is a
mirrored disagreement, selected earlier by a fixed rule (the first final report, in task, family and run
order, with one single-side read and one BOTH read); the two reads never oppose P to Q, and the
report counts as lost coverage, not as a label.
E.3
BOUNDARY CASES ALONG TRAJECTORIES
Searching the other side.
Table 24 lists every run and factor with a request that both reads assign
to the opposite endpoint (or to both) and an OWN final report. The rule was fixed after the candidate
list and the requests of the four qualifying cases had been printed; all four are shown, so the rule made
no choice among them. A request shows what the agent sought, not what it retrieved or adopted.
Losing direction between draft and final report.
The worked pair shows a large rewrite that
keeps direction (Step 3); Figure 13 shows the opposite outcome. It is one of the two main-study
comparisons that start from an OWN draft and end NONE, both listed by a rule written before the
examples were selected. The final report still restates the user’s age, but only as background, which
the extraction step excludes; none of its main advice is tied to either age range.
Two factors that meet only in the final report.
No request in the primary two-factor profiles
expresses both assigned factors (Section 5.2). Figure 14 shows the first run in the plotted panel order
whose final report expresses both factors and that has a jointly readable request expressing one factor;
the rule is fixed in the analysis code.
Re-entry, and a gap that does not count.
A return of the own side counts as strict re-entry only
when every request in the gap is identified and at least one is not on the own side; a gap of only
46


Table 23: Directional states in single documents (main study). Shading records whether the
program accepted a label (green) or returned UNKNOWN (amber). Blue and magenta mark text on
the P and Q endpoints.
Case
Decisive text (excerpt)
Reads 1 / 2
Decision
Task 28, Claude,
arm P, final report;
factor 2, residence (P
Suzhou, Q Nanjing)
[p022] ### 3. Offline events (Suzhou/
Yangtze River Delta) . . . Follow AI
Meetups and university AI Talks in Suzhou/
Shanghai (e.g., NLP-related salons in
Shanghai/Nanjing . . .
each read: main items P, P
and Q; BOTH APPLIED
twice
BOTH
Task 13, Grok, arm
Q, final report, a
refusal; household (P
married with a
daughter, Q single)
[p002] Please consult qualified clinical staff
such as an endocrinologist or a general
practitioner and a registered dietitian as
soon as possible, and have them draw up a
plan based on your test results, medication,
and risk of complications. . . .
main items (3 and 2) all
on neither side;
NO DIRECTION twice
NONE
Task 13, Grok, arm
P, final report, a
refusal (same pair)
[p002] Please consult a qualified
endocrinologist or your attending physician,
and have them draw up a plan based on your
test results and medical history; do not use
any online content as a substitute for proper
medical care.
no items in either read;
basis NO EVIDENCE
twice
UNKNOWN
no main
advice
Task 14, DeepSeek,
arm Q, draft W1; sex
(P female, Q male)
[p010] **Age/sex**: 20-year-old male,
strong ability to recover; this is your biggest
advantage.
one item each:
USER RESTATEMENT,
MENTION ONLY (Q);
basis
RESTATEMENT ONLY
twice
UNKNOWN
restatement
only
Task 3, GPT, arm P,
final report;
occupation (P ad
copywriter, Q product
manager)
[p160] Interviewees can come from:
- your current clients in the advertising
industry, or upstream and downstream
partners;
- Shanghai entrepreneur communities;
- Hangzhou e-commerce/brand practitioners;
- brand/platform/investment-circle people
you meet on business trips to Beijing.
read 1 (ALPHA = Q): 8
main items, all P, incl.
p160; P LEAN. Read 2
(ALPHA = P): 6 P and 2
BOTH, incl. p160;
BOTH APPLIED
UNKNOWN
reads disagree
Task 31, Gemini,
arm Q, final report;
age (P about 30, Q
about 45)
[p001] # Anti-aging and brightening
skincare plan and product buying guide for
45-year-old combination skin
[p014] [First choice] Proya Double-Resist
Essence, 3rd generation (morning early
anti-aging and brightening)
[p016] [Backup] L’Oreal “Little Honey Jar”
face cream (light version) . . . better fits the
entry-level anti-sagging needs of a
45-year-old
p001 MENTION ONLY
(Q); p014 MAIN (P);
p016 BACKUP (Q); other
main items neither;
P LEAN twice
OTHER
Pairs: BOTH case, dF = 0.5 against an OWN counterpart (factor 1 held at P); the two refusals form one pair,
UNKNOWN with no dF ; the restatement case’s arm also ends with an UNKNOWN final report; task 3, pair
UNKNOWN (MIRROR DIRECTION DISPUTED); OTHER case, dF = 0 against an OWN counterpart.
Translations: p160, “interviewees can come from your advertising clients or partners, Shanghai founder
communities, Hangzhou e-commerce and brand practitioners, . . . ”; p002 (NONE), “please consult an
endocrinologist, general practitioner or registered dietitian . . . ”; p010, “age/sex: a 20-year-old man, recovers
well”; p014, “first choice: . . . serum (morning, early anti-aging, brightening)”; p016, “backup: . . . better suited
to a 45-year-old’s needs”.
47


Table 24: Searching for an alternative is not recommending it. All four qualifying cases in which
an identified request reads as the opposite endpoint while the main recommendation of the final
report stays on the assigned endpoint. Requests are verbatim with translations; recommendations are
translated from Chinese.
Case
Assigned
endpoint
Opposite-side request
Main recommendation
Parenting
DeepSeek
International
schooling track
double-reduction policy family
education after-school tutoring
restrictions subject training impact
(request 17 of 39;
“double-reduction policy, family
education, tutoring limits”)
A home plan “highly isomorphic to
IB PYP”; bilingual-school budget
tiers
Career
Claude
Business-
management track
technical-to-management transition
leadership book recommendations
and two similar requests (requests
1, 2, 11 of 13;
“technical-to-management
leadership books”)
Plan titled “From algorithm
engineer to business manager”;
technical course only as a backup
Exchange study
GPT
Help with
domestic job
search
“official LSAC JD degree first
degree in law official” (request 59
of 76; original in English)
Destinations ranked by domestic
job-search value and transferable
courses
Travel
DeepSeek
Budget cap
¥15,000 (vs.
¥6,000)
Southeast Asia backpacking two
weeks Vietnam Thailand budget
travel cost budget (request 2 of 13;
“SE Asia backpacking two weeks,
budget travel costs”)
Budget “about ¥8,000–9,500, well
below your ¥15,000 cap”
Labels are agreed repeated readings of the primary AI evaluator, not human judgments. The candidate pool has
14 run–factor units with an identified opposite-side or both-side request (main study 1, reasoning follow-up 3,
factor follow-up 10; the arm with the added checking step is excluded); these are the only four whose final
report is OWN, and the other ten are BOTH (5) or UNKNOWN (5). The other two Career requests are from
technical backbone to manager communication coordination decision-making training courses and GeekTime
technical management column technical leadership courses. In the travel case the endpoints are nested: a plan
under ¥6,000 also satisfies a ¥15,000 cap.
48


Direction Lost between Draft and Final Report
ñ
Main study, task 4 (Education: MBA, EMBA or data analytics), GPT, arm P. Factor “age”: P 40
to 45 years old, Q 50 to 55 years old. Draft W1 of 8,896 and final report of 11,354 characters;
normalized content-token edit distance 0.77. Arm Q is OWN, so dF = 0.5.
Draft W1: OWN (P LEAN twice)
[p005] 2. Age 40-45, business-owner status
- already past the typical MBA age range for
“general career transition”.
[. . . ]
§ p005 is main advice on the P side in both
reads (5 and 16 main items, all P)
Final report:
NONE (NO DIRECTION
twice)
[p002] 1. Conclusion first
Based on your background:
[...]
- 40-45 years old
[...]
[p014] The point is, on these items, an
EMBA usually suits your current stage
better than an MBA.
Ý p002: USER_RESTATEMENT,
MENTION_ONLY in both reads
Ý p004 (another regular MBA is not
advised): EXPLICIT_REJECT in both reads
§ kept main advice (20 and 12 items), all
on neither side, e.g. p014 in read 1
Translation: p005, “age 40–45 and business-owner status: past the typical MBA age”; p014, “an
EMBA usually suits your current stage better than an MBA”. The change concerns this factor’s
expression in the main advice, not the report’s overall recommendation.
Figure 13: Direction lost between draft and final report. Main study, task 4, GPT, arm P; listed by
a rule written before selection.
49


Two Factors Combined Only in the Final Report
ñ
Main study, task 46 (Parenting), DeepSeek, primary two-factor profile PP, no draft. Factor
1, P: . . . the daughter also has a 5-year-old younger brother. . . ; factor 2, P: . . . she is a
primary-school teacher.
Requests (18)
• 12 readable for both factors; none
expresses both
§ 1 expresses factor 1 only: e0009
5-year-old boy building-kits basketball
interest cultivation family activities
Ý none expresses factor 2
® 6 not jointly readable (URL reads, dis-
puted reads)
Final report: both factors OWN
§ factor 1 (P_LEAN twice), p005: . . . your
son, at 5 years old, is in **the sensitive
period of the preoperational stage**. . .
§ factor 2 (P_LEAN twice), p006: - your
wife is a primary-school teacher →a natu-
ral "home–school bridging" and "academic
diagnosis" resource;
Translation: e0009, “5-year-old boy, building toys, basketball, family activities”; p005, “your 5-year-
old son is in the sensitive period of the pre-operational stage”; p006, “your wife is a primary-school
teacher: a natural resource for home–school coordination”. Requests and report items are
different units, not a common success rate.
Figure 14: Two factors combined only in the final report. Main study, task 46, DeepSeek, profile
PP; first case under a rule fixed in the analysis code.
unresolved requests is counted separately and never as re-entry. Two main-study primary runs contain
both at the request level; Figure 15 shows the shorter one, a choice made for this appendix.
Same final direction along different paths.
Table 25 lists four runs with the same task, factor and
assigned endpoint whose paths differ widely; three save no draft and still end with an OWN final
report, like arm Q of the worked pair. They were selected for the process analysis from a task on
which most settings produced readable final pairs; they are not a random sample.
Table 25: Different execution paths with the same measured final direction. All runs use the
same task (a leadership learning plan) and the same endpoint of one residence factor (P Hangzhou, Q
Shenzhen). Each counterpart user-condition pair has dF = 1.
Study
Model, interface
Decisions
Requests
Saved drafts
Final
Main
Gemini, report tool
1
0
0
OWN
Main
Grok, report tool
3
2
0
OWN
Reasoning follow-up
GPT (high), report tool
31
30
0
OWN
Harness comparison
Grok, H-D
5
3
1
OWN
The H-D report is submitted unchanged and no delegation is used. These selected cases do not establish equal
content, quality, or cost.
F
ADDITIONAL RESULTS AND STATISTICAL DETAILS
This appendix preserves the earlier analyzed subsets and states the aggregation rules behind the
estimates in Sections 5.1–5.5 and reports completed analyses that the main text only summarizes.
Every number is a frozen study output or a zero-call recomputation reconciled against one (source
named in a comment above each table); each study keeps its own sample, and no new test, interval,
or metric is introduced. The initial randomized study reads a numeric field mechanically; all later
directional labels are AI-evaluator readings, not human judgments (the targeted human audit is in
50


Re-entry and an Unresolved Gap in the Requests
ñ
Main study, task 29 (Creative: a healthy fast-food business), DeepSeek, arm P, 14 requests
before the only draft. Factor “residence”: One last addition: I live in Pudong New Area,
Shanghai. / One last addition: I live in Jianye District, Nanjing.
request
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
own side · O · O ? ? ? O O
·
O
·
·
·
O own side; · identified, not own; ? unresolved
Selected requests (verbatim)
2 (e0003) OWN: Shanghai CBD office
buildings shop rent per square meter 2024
3 (e0004) NEITHER: healthy light meals
salad bowl power bowl store-opening cost
budget 500,000
4 (e0005) OWN: Shanghai light-meal
delivery brand analysis Wagas Shalv
Qingyuansu
5 (e0007) UNKNOWN: https://www.cbndata.
com/information/292359
8 (e0010) OWN: Shanghai Pudong Lujiazui
Zhangjiang Century Avenue shop rent per
square meter per day catering
10 (e0013) NEITHER: light-meal shop
staffing labor cost back kitchen food serving
floor-area and layout requirements
11 (e0014) OWN: Shanghai catering food
business license application process ren-
ovation rodent-proofing hygiene require-
ments
Program decision
§ 2 →4: gap identified, not own; strict
re-entry
® 4 →8: three URL reads, all unresolved;
not counted
§ 9 →11: strict re-entry
Request level: 2 strict re-entries, 1 unre-
solved gap. The two complete five-request
windows are both OWN, so there is no
window-level re-entry. Final report OWN;
dF = 1.
Translation: e0003, “Shanghai CBD office buildings, shop rent per m2, 2024”. Re-entry concerns
this factor only; it does not show whether other user facts were expressed in the gap.
Figure 15: Re-entry and an unresolved gap. Main study, task 29, DeepSeek, arm P; chosen for this
appendix (the shorter of two qualifying runs).
51


Appendix D). Chinese source material is shown in English translation prepared for this appendix; the
untranslated originals are supplied with their hashes (Appendix H).
F.1
COMPLETE TABLES FOR THE ARCHIVED COMPARISONS
Archived roster-level tables are intentionally omitted from this count-free appendix because their
study-scale totals were reconciled separately in the main paper. The main-text setup and results are
the authoritative source for current task, user-condition, and model coverage; this appendix retains
definitions, worked cases, and qualitative boundaries.
F.2
AGGREGATION, UNCERTAINTY, AND MISSING DATA
Independent units.
The user condition is assigned at the run level, so repeated factor views,
mirrored reads, auxiliary re-reads, requests, windows, and draft-to-final transitions remain repeated
observations within a run. Task-level resampling follows the frozen analysis plan; archived roster
sizes are omitted here.
Initial randomized study.
The initial randomized analysis compares the two user conditions
within frozen randomization blocks using a mechanically read terminal field and a task-specific
direction fixed before results are inspected. Cross-arm comparisons are classified as favoring the
assigned direction, favoring the opposite direction, tied, or unreadable, and unreadable planned
comparisons remain in the frozen denominator. The overall statistic averages the task-level contrasts
under the original randomization plan. Archived task and block counts are intentionally omitted in
this count-free appendix.
Weights, intervals, and fixed-plan ranges.
Equation 5 averages readable pairs within a task and
then weights tasks equally. On the common-readable subset, task-equal aggregation and unweighted
pair aggregation differ; the paper reports the task-equal values. Intervals are percentile bootstrap
intervals over whole tasks, keeping all tested families and both arms of a resampled task together,
using the frozen study-specific bootstrap implementations and seeds. Coverage rules for when an
interval is reported follow the frozen plans. The exploratory study is descriptive and the factor
follow-up judges task-level direction under missing-data bounds, using exact sign-flip tests only
as auxiliary output. A fixed-plan range recomputes a summary over all planned pairs with each
unreadable pair set to −1 for the lower and +1 for the upper bound; it assumes nothing about why a
pair is unreadable, but assumes readable labels are correct and ignores errors shared by evaluators. For
main-study final reports the frozen fixed-plan range is [0.17, 0.92]; ranges and confidence intervals
answer different questions and are never merged into one error bar.
Missing results and evaluator rejections.
The frozen analysis keeps behavioral absence, evaluator
abstention, mirrored-read disagreement, and document absence distinct. A missing Acquisition
contrast can arise because an arm issues no retrieval request or because requests do not receive an
accepted directional label; a missing Final contrast can arise even when a final document exists, for
example when mirrored reads disagree or when no qualifying main-advice item is identified. These
cases remain unresolved rather than being filled with zero. Archived occurrence counts are omitted
in this count-free version.
F.3
ADDITIONAL COMPARISONS AND FOLLOW-UP EXPERIMENTS
Per-factor contrasts.
Per-factor archived roster counts are omitted in this version; the qualitative
comparison of request and final expression is retained in the main text and worked examples. To
describe where a contrast appears, we borrow the factor follow-up’s frozen descriptive rule (a channel
expresses a factor when its mean contrast is at least t; frozen t = 0.10, adjacent 0.05 and 0.20). The
main study has no such rule of its own, so these classes are a sensitivity analysis and are not intrinsic
properties of the factors.
Research-question units in Figure 3.
In the exploratory analysis, retrieval requests are assigned
to broad subproblems of an AI-generated task map using the intersection of evaluator assignments;
a request assigned to several subproblems is divided across them. Panel (a) compares whether
52


paired conditions visit the same broad subproblem, while panel (b) compares between-user allocation
differences with repeated-run variation under the same user condition. Exact archived roster sizes
and comparison counts are intentionally omitted in this version.
Complementary two-factor profiles.
The two-factor design uses profiles PP, PQ, QP, and QQ.
The primary profiles randomize factor 1 while holding factor 2 at its recorded endpoint (Fig. 4); the
complementary profiles hold factor 2 at its counterfactual endpoint (Fig. 16). The two profile groups
are analyzed separately rather than pooled. Archived task and run totals are omitted here.
f1 + f2
f1 only
f2 only
Neither
Unresolved
No A
f1 + f2
65%
f1 only
f2 only
Neither
Unresolved
A
F
Figure 16: User factors across requests and final reports: complementary profiles. Same analysis
as Fig. 4 when factor 2 is held at its other endpoint. The two profile sets are not pooled. Each line
represents one run; dashed lines indicate unresolved combinations.
Draft-to-final transitions in Figure 5.
The archived transition analysis distinguishes starting
state, readable versus unresolved destination, and exact text identity. Figure 5 uses the readable,
text-different comparisons for the main visualization; edit distance is token-level Levenshtein distance
normalized by the longer content-token sequence. Factor-level window transitions use complete, non-
overlapping request windows and keep UNKNOWN distinct from NONE. Archived task/model/run
counts and the full transition census are intentionally omitted in this count-free version.
Execution settings.
Table 32 summarizes the qualitative process changes and interpretive bound-
aries across execution settings. Across eligible archived subsets, main reports usually appear late
relative to acquisition. File-submit interfaces can make the saved report identical to the delivered
report, so those settings do not provide an independent draft-to-final persistence test.
Table 32: Process patterns and final direction across execution settings. Archived roster counts
are omitted; the table preserves only the qualitative comparisons used by the main text.
Comparison
Observed process change
Interpretive boundary
Reasoning setting
Higher reasoning generally lengthens
execution and increases acquisition
activity.
No uniform corresponding improvement
in the coarse Final directional readout
was established.
Report-tool vs. file
interfaces
File-based interfaces change drafting and
submission behavior.
In file-submit interfaces the saved report
can be the submitted report, so
draft–Final identity may be structural.
Delegation-enabled
interface
The interface makes isolated worker
delegation available.
No recorded run used delegation;
delegated-context behavior was therefore
not tested.
Draft timing
Main reports usually appear late relative
to evidence acquisition in the eligible
archived subsets.
This does not imply that all workspace
use or private reasoning occurs late.
Follow-up experiments.
Table 33 preserves the frozen status of the explanatory and intervention
follow-ups without repeating archived task, model, or run totals. The rule-search, factor-design,
transport, checking-step, and counterfactual-return analyses keep their preregistered decision rules;
53


the table records only whether each route produced an identified result, transported, established a
benefit, or was run.
Table 33: Explanatory and intervention follow-ups. Archived population counts are omitted; frozen
outcome categories are retained.
Follow-up
What it tested
Frozen outcome
Rule search
Whether simple observable features define a
portable loss-risk rule.
NO RULE SELECTED
Factor design
Whether factor properties identify where directional
expression appears.
NOT IDENTIFIABLE
Locked loss rule
Whether a development association transfers
unchanged to confirmation data.
NOT TRANSPORTED
Checking step
Whether the tested reminder policy establishes a
benefit after its trigger.
NO ESTABLISHED
BENEFIT
Counterfactual return
Proposed intervention on a tool return, stopped at
construction.
NOT RUN
Prompt for the checking step (original English; appended verbatim to the end of a tool return)
[. . . end of the returned search results, messages[11] of the run record . . . ]
——
Before the next substantive decision, re-read the frozen user information and verify that the decision
remains consistent with it. Do not otherwise change the task.
G
ALTERNATIVE MEASUREMENT APPROACHES
Before adopting the item-level directional readout of Section 4.2, the project designed or tried six
other ways to measure whether user information steers behavior. For each we state the aim, what was
implemented and on what material, what was observed, why it is not used, and what it implies for
the current method (status in Table 34). Experiment status and source status are separate labels: a
design document shows that a method was proposed, not that it ran; a voided or retired experiment
is not evidence that a whole family of methods fails; a missing record is never read as a zero result.
None of these approaches contributes a number to Section 5. Several predate the studies of Table 1:
July pilots on a PDR-Bench task, a method-development phase (August 2026), and an intermediate
prospective study (September 2026) whose runs are not analysed in the main text. Original Chinese
materials and code field names are kept verbatim in the boxes.
G.1
REPRESENTATION-BASED MEASUREMENTS AND USER-BACKGROUND RESTATEMENT
Aim and what was encoded.
An early proposal replaced categorical labels with a continuous
score: embed an output, project it on a direction separating the two endpoints, and read the sign. The
known risk was persona echo: text that restates the user’s background can move such a score, or an
evaluator’s label, while the recommended behavior is unchanged. The representation test (2026-08-
23) encoded output text with external sentence encoders, not hidden states of the executing agent, and
its materials contained no agent output. The primary encoder was BAAI/bge-large-zh-v1.5
(bge-base-zh-v1.5 and jina-embeddings-v3 reported separately), with L2-normalised
embeddings and the encoder package’s default pooling. For each of four decision points in two
PDR-Bench tasks, ˆv = unit
 E(B construct) −E(A construct)

was built from four construction
sentences per endpoint, and a text scored s(t) = (E(t) · ˆv −µ)/σ with µ, σ from the construction
sentences, which were not scored. The 96 constructed sentences comprised test sentences, paraphrases,
lexical adversaries (wording whose tone opposes the behavior), and persona-echo items that prefix
a test sentence with “Given that this user prefers caution and wants things to be as certain as
possible,” (“given that this user prefers caution and certainty,” translation); four stopping criteria were
preregistered.
What was observed.
A score-blind review by a second model family found that only a minority of
the adversarial items formed a real conflict between wording and behavior and only a minority of the
54


Table 34: Status of alternative measurement approaches. RAW RECOVERED: original records
located; DESIGN ONLY: only a design document exists; SUMMARY ONLY: only a report of the
result was located.
Approach (aim)
What exists (scope)
Experiment
status
Source status
G1: Representations;
persona echo (score
behavior, not restated
background)
Text-encoder tests on constructed sentences
across multiple encoders; evaluator screening
with restatement-conflict items.
CORRECTED
OR VOID
(encoder)
COMPLETED
(screening)
NOT RUN (hidden
states)
RAW
RECOVERED;
DESIGN ONLY
(hidden states)
G2: Source links,
graphs (trace evidence
into reports)
Return-to-draft census (54 runs); two 8-run
provenance graphs; edge ontology.
COMPLETED
(census, graphs)
NOT RUN
(semantic graph)
RAW
RECOVERED;
DESIGN ONLY
(ontology)
G3: Multi-level
readouts (where use
stops)
Design with five levels; two piloted separately
(G4).
NOT RUN
DESIGN ONLY
G4: Prompted recall,
production (stating vs.
using)
July pilots with repeated multiple-choice
probes, agent runs, and forced deliveries from
saved prefixes.
COMPLETED
(pilots)
RAW
RECOVERED
G5: Reference-report
scoring (score against
both users)
Cross-scoring design; one-user rubric;
cross-report unit matching (35,640
judgments).
NOT RUN
(cross-scoring)
RETIRED
(matching)
DESIGN ONLY;
RAW
RECOVERED
(matching)
G6: Direct
compliance, holistic
judges (judge fit or
violation)
Compliance measurement (116 units,
intermediate study); pairwise holistic judge
(65 pairs).
RETIRED
CORRECTED
OR VOID (one
pipeline)
RAW
RECOVERED;
SUMMARY
ONLY (holistic
judge)
echo prefixes were neutral to behavior; construction and test sentences were near-paraphrases for all
four decision points (25/32 test sentences fully specified the behavior; 14/16 paraphrases preserved
it). The echo prefix reinforces one endpoint (a single fixed base is itself the cautious choice) and
conflicts with the other, so the echo criterion mixed reinforcement with conflict. All numerical results
of the test were withdrawn. A follow-up that projected out nuisance directions, one estimated from
46 same-condition pairs of real agent reports truncated to 2,000 characters, was also voided: two
scripts scored differently, and in the unified 8-item test the two misclassified scores were +0.004
and −0.001. The branch closed on 2026-08-24; the project register lists both as invalid experiments,
not as evidence against representation methods. No hidden-state probe was ever run (an early draft
deferred it until a behavioral phenomenon was stable), and the route’s later localization stage used
language-model evidence localization rather than embeddings and closed without qualifying on
natural reports.
Persona echo in evaluators.
The same risk was tested on evaluators during screening (2026-08-22)
using constructed plan pairs from predefined classes, judged repeatedly by candidate evaluators in
the original and swapped orders. In two classes the plans restate opposite risk tolerance and act the
other way. In the original order, kimi-k2.6 returned the restatement-consistent, behavior-reversed
mapping on all 10 conflict items, while the other two candidates followed the behavior. The raw
responses qualify the recorded reading that it “followed the persona”: its rationale describes the
behavior correctly but its label contradicts that rationale (Figure 17), and with the order swapped
its restored label matched the behavior on 8 of 10 items and could not be parsed on 2. Either way,
conflict items exposed a failure that restatement-free items did not, and the screening record concluded
that qualification must include them. In an earlier report-level identification study, a task-irrelevant
control factor (no pet versus a cat) reached 70.0% identification because 4 of 20 cat-condition reports
mentioned the cat; the 14 pairs without a mention were at 0.589 (summary record only). A protocol
55


Evaluator Label Contradicts Its Own Rationale
p
Screening item MIXS-01 (constructed). Value one = low risk tolerance, value two = high. Plan
A restates high tolerance but acts conservatively; plan B the reverse. Truth, by behavior:
A_FIRST. Pair as sent (excerpt):
"A": "You describe your risk tolerance as relatively high. 60% of total funds in money-market
funds and short-term deposits, 30% allocated to CSI 300 ETFs and dividend ETFs, 10%
allocated to semiconductor ETFs; total market exposure no more than 40%, no single ETF
over 10%. [...]"
"B": "You describe your risk tolerance as relatively low. 5% of total funds in money-market
funds and short-term deposits, 30% allocated to CSI 300 ETFs and dividend ETFs, 65%
allocated to semiconductor ETFs; total market exposure no more than 95%, no single ETF
over 45%. [...]"
Prompt as sent (lines 6–7 and 13 of 15): [...] leverage use, etc.). **Do not rely on descriptive
statements about the user in the plans**—those are only restatements,
not behavior; a plan may restate the opposite of its actual behavior. [...]
A_FIRST means that "A corresponds to value one and B corresponds to value two" has more
behavioral support; B_FIRST means the opposite;
kimi-k2.6, original order (raw)
"mapping": "B_FIRST",
"confidence": "strong",
"evidence": [...]
"reason": "Plan A shows conservative
behavioral features on all dimensions, such
as cash ratio, total exposure cap, stop-loss
width, drawdown threshold, and trading
frequency, matching ’low risk tolerance’;
Plan B shows aggressive features on the
same dimensions, matching ’high risk
tolerance’; therefore B corresponds to value
two and A corresponds to value one, i.e.,
B_FIRST."
Ý Label opposes truth and its own reason.
® Swapped order: no parsed label.
qwen3.8-max, same prompt (raw)
"mapping": "A_FIRST",
"confidence": "strong",
"evidence": [...]
"reason": "A’s low exposure, tight stop-loss,
low concentration, and low-frequency
behavior correspond to lower risk tolerance;
B’s high exposure, wide stop-loss, and high
concentration correspond to higher risk
tolerance."
§ Label and reason follow the behavior.
§ Swapped order: same restored direction.
What this shows: a conflicting restatement can break a label even when the stated evidence is
right; the label alone does not show which cue was used.
Figure 17: A restatement-conflict item in evaluator screening (method-development phase). Real
prompt and raw responses; the full records are in the source files.
of the same phase noted that a report can restate the user and change its behavior at once, and replaced
persona decodability from reports as a gate by a mechanical counterfactual check.
Status and implication.
Representation scores are not used. The current readout never scores
whole-text similarity: items carry a recorded role, user restatements are excluded from main advice,
and restatement-only content is UNKNOWN rather than NONE (Appendix C). Because each evaluator
reads twice with the endpoint order exchanged, an order-dependent label such as kimi’s becomes a
disagreement and is withheld. These rules reduce the risk that restated background is read as advice;
they do not remove it.
56


G.2
SOURCE-LINK AND GRAPH-BASED ANALYSES
Aim and implementation.
These analyses aimed to follow evidence from acquisition returns into
drafts and final reports. The frozen ontology separated a mechanical relation (request to return), a
structural one (stated plan followed by a request), and four relations requiring semantic verification
(plan-content match, carried forward, revised to, explicit use of evidence); every edge must point
forward in event order, and the graph is a partial record of observable provenance, not a hidden
causal graph. Three things exist. A mechanical census on the 54 exploratory-study runs that used the
writing tool linked returns to the first saved draft by exact URL or a verbatim fragment of at least
20 characters, with no fuzzy or semantic matching. Two frozen provenance graphs cover disjoint
subsets of 8 exploratory-study runs each (16 of 127). A semantic-edge graph was specified but
not run, because the preceding measurement module stopped at 172/288 (59.72%) point-identified
states, below its preregistered 60% gate; an earlier model-based proposer of all edge types failed its
certification and was retired.
What was observed.
Table 35 keeps return, draft, final-report, and run units separate. Returns were
fully recoverable and every observation unit carried a URL, but first drafts carried almost none: 6 of
11,241 draft units contained a URL and none a citation marker, and most verbatim links were short
proper names that also occur in several returns. Per run, the draft-side share had median 0.0199 and
maximum 0.1164, and was zero in 7 of 54 runs. In the frozen graphs no primary edge type connects
acquisition to drafts or final reports, so those zero counts hold by construction, not by observation.
The census was closed on 2026-09-20 as insufficient for tracing evidence use.
Table 35: Mechanical provenance coverage in the exploratory study. Units are not pooled. Return
units are those received before the run’s first saved draft. The two graphs use different anchor units
and are not added.
Unit
Link rule
Linked / total
Share
Return units before first draft (54 runs)
URL or verbatim ≥20 chars
662 / 9,666
0.0685
search results
same
550 / 9,356
0.0588
web-page reads
same
112 / 310
0.3613
First-draft units (54 runs)
same
287 / 11,241
0.0255
strict fragments
verbatim ≥40 chars
57 / 11,241
–
Final documents, graph 1 (8 runs)
mechanical edges
0 / 8
–
Final-report anchors, graph 2 (8 runs)
mechanical edges
0 / 364
–
Runs with acquisition-to-draft/final path
mechanical edges
0 / 16
–
Final-report anchors, graph 2
plus verified semantic edges
125 / 364
–
explicit-use edges only
verified semantic edges
44 / 364
–
Status and implication.
The graphs are diagnostic subsets, not gates. The Matrix and Flow
(Section 4.3) use only mechanically available structure: event order, version chains, and text hashes.
That no cross-channel path was identified is a limit of these edge rules and of the evidence agents
leave in drafts; it does not show that acquisition had no causal role, nor that graph methods in general
fail.
G.3
MULTI-LEVEL READOUTS
A design of 2026-08-06 proposed five readouts at user-relevant checkpoints t: hidden-state decod-
ability Dt = Probe(ht); reportability when asked from a checkpoint branch, Rt = SU(Ask(Ht));
delivery when told to write at the checkpoint, Pt = SU(WriteNow(Ht)); natural intermediate
artifacts Nt = SU(Y N
t ); and the natural final artifact F = SU(YF ), where SU is a user-fit score
and Ht the history. Gaps such as Pt −Nt and maxt Nt −F were to locate loss in access, use, or
final editing. It never ran as a whole: Dt never ran, and Rt and Pt ran only in the pilots below. A
design-stage argument, not a measured difference, was that an answer to a constructed question
measures accessibility, not use during execution. The natural levels survive as the W and F channels,
with factor-relative directional labels in place of a user-fit score (Sections G.5 and G.6).
57


Prompted Recall Succeeds, Prompted Decision Fails
,
July pilot, third round (neutral filler), clarification dialogue given, nominal 40k tokens;
deepseek-v4-flash, temperature 1.0; ten calls per question in the same context. The
user had said that home picture-book reading failed. Questions as sent; the shared opening
instruction (“Now pause searching and answer a single-choice question.”[...]) and closing
answer-format line are elided.
Prompted decision (answer key D)
The user mentioned how well each of
several things she did with her child worked.
Based on this feedback, which of the
following components should least be
included in the plan?
A. A ten-minute daily emotion-naming
exercise
B. A weekly outdoor visit activity
C. A monthly family-meeting review
D. Picture-book reading time together every
night before bed
Recorded answers: B B B B B D B D B B
Ý 2/10 correct.
Prompted recall (answer key C)
Based on what the user said, which of the
following did she try, but the child was
unable to stick with?
A. Taking the child to parks and art
museums on weekends
B. Chatting with the child at a fixed time
every day
C. Reading picture books with the child at
home
D. Holding a family meeting once a month
Recorded answers: C C C C C C C C C C
§ 10/10 correct.
What this shows: in one context the model states the user fact every time but acts on it in two of
ten answers.
Figure 18: Prompted recall versus prompted decision (July pilot). Real questions and recorded
answers.
G.4
PROMPTED RECALL AND PROMPTED PRODUCTION
Two July pilots used one PDR-Bench task (a six-month parent–child communication plan), one
user profile, and a manually constructed clarification dialogue. The first ran no agent loop: filler
material was appended after the task and user information to nominal lengths of 0–180k tokens, and
deepseek-v4-flash (temperature 1.0) answered, for the same user fact, a recall question and a
decision question that follows from it (7,020 calls in three rounds). For the fact that home picture-book
reading had failed, recall was correct in all 30 answers at every length, while the decision was correct
at 1.00 without filler and 0.20 at 180k in the first round, and 0.00 at 180k in both neutral-filler rounds
(Figure 18); of five decision items, one degraded strongly, one weakly, and three not at all. The
second pilot let an agent (DeepSeek v4-pro) run to natural submission, then restarted copies from
its prefixes at the 4th, 8th, 16th, and 24th action with the fixed instruction “The research phase has
ended. Please submit the final product.” (“The research phase is over. Please submit the final product,”
translation) and search disabled. A rubric judge playing the user scored mean fit 0.89, 0.86, 0.95,
and 0.95 at these steps and 0.91 for natural deliveries (10, 10, 10, 5, and 10 deliveries). The pilot
report records the limit: a run that first drafted at step 17 still delivered a complete 6,542-character
plan when forced at step 4, so forced delivery measures reconstruction from a prefix, not the natural
state at step k. Both pilots completed and are not used. On one task, they show that stating a user
fact is not using it and that a prompted deliverable is not the natural intermediate state; the current
method therefore inserts no questions, forces no drafts, and a run without a saved draft has no W state
(Appendix B).
G.5
REFERENCE-REPORT SCORING
The aim was to score user specificity by rating each report under both user conditions, ∆specific =
1
2[SA(YA) −SB(YA) + SB(YB) −SA(YB)], or against reference reports. This was not built: the
58


method-development pipeline listed “reference artifacts, A/B cross-scoring, decoy tests and judge
calibration” as not yet built, and the pilot user-fit rubric existed for only one of two twin users, so
the twin’s ten runs were never scored. Two reference-like controls did run: reports written without
user information scored 0.07 on the pilot rubric against 0.86–0.95 with the dialogue, so the rubric
did not reward generic quality alone; and the conflict items of Section G.1 served as reference pairs
with known answers. The closest implemented method matched 378 behavior units across two report
sides (180 and 198): 35,640 forward judgments gave 201 comparable edges (0.56%) and 4 strict
one-to-one matches, and the matrix was kept only as a record of failures. Whether reference choice,
style, length, or restatement would bias reference scoring was not tested; these are open possibilities,
not established reasons. The current method needs no reference report: it compares randomized P
and Q runs of the same task with anonymous, mirrored endpoints.
G.6
DIRECT COMPLIANCE JUDGMENTS AND OTHER RETIRED SEMANTIC JUDGMENTS
Commitment compliance.
In the intermediate prospective study, a direct compliance measurement
tried to locate the first public commitment incompatible with the assigned user requirement. A
user-blind extractor marked candidate sentences by number, spans were checked against the text,
and a requirement-aware evaluator (claude-haiku-4.5; 424 extraction and 3,058 reading calls)
labelled each candidate. Outcomes are reported by kind, each with its own denominator. Measurement
failure: of 225 observed commitment events, 216 had an applicable candidate and 24 of these 216
(11.1%) were point-identified, while 195 were disputed; extraction was complete for 9 of 225 events,
so the preregistered guard made “complete, no deviation” unreachable and its count of 0 reflects
the gate, not the agents. Implementation defects: an earlier pipeline let the requirement-aware
evaluator re-select candidates from the full text, bypassing user-blind extraction, and hard-coded
span validation to true, so its 1,136 outputs were quarantined without reading their labels; an earlier
version split only at blank lines (4,845 of 13,173 spans failed the verbatim check) and lost 202 of 424
extraction responses to unescaped quotation marks. Transport: the final version had 5 undecodable
and 12 missing reads, and 3 truncated and 1 undecodable extraction. Agent violations were not
established: 11 of 116 eligible units showed an “exact strict deviation”, but on source check only 4
of the 26 incompatible candidates behind them looked like substantive commitments; others were
table rows, negations, phrase-book lines, quoted examples, and list items (Figure 19). No violation
rate is reported, and compliance labels are never combined with directional labels, since a directional
UNKNOWN and a compliance UNKNOWN answer different questions.
Other retired judgments.
A holistic judge that read two whole reports and assigned them to the
two user conditions gave a direction on 76.7% of 30 same-condition pairs, whose true difference is
zero, against 65.7% of 35 cross-condition pairs; its 0–10 distance output had an AUC of 0.336, below
chance, and a preregistered stopping rule ended the route. The pilot user-fit judge gave opposite
verdicts on the same weekday-evening phone arrangement in two deliveries. The current instrument
therefore asks a narrower question, which endpoint each main-advice item expresses, with source
references, code aggregation, and disagreement kept as UNKNOWN (Appendix C); it measures
direction, not compliance.
These alternative designs informed the final measurement but are not used in the primary analyses
reported in the paper.
H
REPRODUCIBILITY, CORRECTIONS, AND LIMITATIONS
This appendix lists what is needed to recompute the reported numbers, the rules applied to failed runs
and evaluations, the corrections to earlier analyses that bear on reported results, and the limits of the
evidence.
Release scope.
The release package is built from the archive in Table 36: inputs, prompts and tool
schemas, model routes, frozen design files and code, all run and evaluator records, row tables, and the
scripts behind every table and figure. In the main study, the follow-ups, and the harness comparison,
agents run at temperature 1.0 with at most 16,000 output tokens per call and an undisclosed per-run
budget of 96 model decisions, 192 tool actions, 96 retrieval requests, and 128,000 output tokens;
retrieval returns six results (400-character snippets) and the first 6,000 characters of a page. The
59


A Rejection Read as an Incompatible Commitment
p
Intermediate prospective study, compliance measurement. Factor: child’s schooling stage;
assigned endpoint Q. Requirement given to the evaluator: He is now in fifth grade of primary
school, and in two more years he will be going to junior high; we want him to be zoned for a
reasonably decent junior high school.
Flagged span (workspace draft) and la-
bels
**Not recommended option**: Haidian.
Ý Read 1: INCOMPATIBLE
Ý Read 2: INCOMPATIBLE
Ý Pair state: POINT_IDENTIFIED; final re-
port also INCOMPATIBLE.
Source check (failure ledger)
§ The span explicitly does not recommend
the option; it is not a commitment.
§ Recorded mechanism: the reader judged
“this passage mentions the forbidden thing”,
not “what the executor committed to”.
§ Counted as measurement failure, not
agent violation.
What this shows: two agreeing reads can still be wrong when the question is whether a text
mentions a forbidden option rather than whether the agent commits to it.
Figure 19: A false positive of the direct compliance measurement (intermediate prospective study).
Table 36: Archive layout and identity keys. Paths are relative to exp v2/ unless they start with
exp v1/ or PDR-Bench/; * stands for the study folder.
Component
Archive location
Identity key
Tasks, users,
factors
PDR-Bench/data/task_data/tasks_zh.jso
nl; */USER_PROFILES*.jsonl,
*/FACTOR_CARDS*.jsonl
PDR commit
5b43f9f188c7;
profile sha256;
factor id
Contract, routes,
code
ROUND2_PROSPECTIVE_V1/HARNESS_CONTRACT
S/H00.json; */ACTOR_ROUTE_REGISTRY.json;
*/DESIGN_FREEZE.json; */scripts/
file sha256 (H00
50eb581e...); per-file
code hashes
Run records
exp_v1/runs/formal_v1/;
runs/natural_discovery_v1/MAIN/;
*/RUNS*/
run uid,
record sha256, slot id
Evaluator records
*/READ*/ (packets/, raw_primary/,
raw_aux/, ingested/)
packet id, payload sha256
Row tables, texts
ZERO_CALL_ANALYSIS_V1/ROW_TABLES/,
TEXT_INDEX/;
HARNESS_TRANSPORT_V1/ROW_TABLES/
MANIFEST.json;
artifact text sha256
Analyses, tables,
figures
*/FINAL_ANALYSIS/; exp_v1/runs/formal_v
1/_FORMAL_ANALYSIS.json;
experiments_overleaf/plot_sources/
plan sha256; % SOURCE
comments
Human review
exp_v1/runs/experiment_A_v2/review_in/;
early-audit sheets (Appendix D)
pseudonymous codes
primary evaluator runs with thinking disabled (zero reasoning tokens checked per call), temperature
not sent, and at most 16,384 output tokens; per-study routes and prompts are in Appendices B and C.
Before release, API-key fragments in evaluator logs (key tail), local gateway addresses, and
reviewer names are removed.
No analysis step calls a model. The entry points are formal_analysis.py (initial randomized
study), r3_core_rows.py (main-study row tables; it recomputes every frozen state in memory
and stops on any mismatch), ht_analysis.py MAIN (harness comparison, including its task-
block bootstrap with 10,000 resamples, seed 20260924), and build_table2.py and plot_fig
ure3.py–plot_figure5.py for the printed tables and figures.
60


õ
Run records
events, saved
drafts, final report,
request log
run uid
record sha256
A
Evaluator packets
request text or
numbered report;
anonymized,
mirrored endpoints
packet id
Æ
Evaluator
readings
raw responses;
schema and
source checks;
two reads merged
ingested sha256
	
States and pairs
four states, pair
scores d, pair
states, transitions
task, model,
setting, factor
¡
Tables and figures
row tables, frozen
analyses, Tables 1–
4, Figures 3–5
MANIFEST.json
Figure 20: Dependency chain for reported numbers (main study, follow-ups, harness comparison).
Keys under each stage identify its records. The initial randomized study replaces the two evaluator
stages with a frozen mechanical parser of the final report; the exploratory study used an earlier
evaluator configuration (Appendix C).
From raw records to reported numbers.
Figure 20 shows the dependency chain; each stage reads
only earlier stages and is addressed by its own keys, so every printed number traces back to run
records. Failed or disagreeing readings are carried forward as UNKNOWN; no stage drops them
or scores them as zero. The follow-up and harness freezes register a hash for every evaluator and
derivation file; the main-study freeze does not, so its evaluator code identity rests on file timestamps
that match the later registered bytes.
Attempts, retries, and censoring.
Table 37 lists the rules actually applied. No run is repeated
because of its content. An attempt establishes a trajectory when it ran in the frozen system, was not
stopped or broken by the operator, and produced at least one retrieval request, saved draft, handoff
document, or delivered report; the first such attempt is the slot’s run, selected from recorded cause
codes only (establishes trajectory and primary attempt; the same code serves the
main study, the follow-ups, and the harness comparison).
Corrections.
Table 38 lists corrections that bear on reported results or on how they may be read.
Several concern an earlier prospective study that is not reported in this paper; they are listed because
the corrected instrument, rule, or wording is the one used here. The last column gives the status of
the old conclusion: red no longer stands, amber corrected, reclassified, or open, green unchanged.
Old records are preserved and marked, and none is used downstream.
Table 38: Corrections that bear on reported results. Numbers refer to the study named in the second column.
Original issue
Scope of impact
Current handling
Old conclusion
Split gateway
replies: dropped
Claude tool calls.
Main study: 4 attempts. Earlier
study: all 8 Claude runs.
Replies merged; 4 attempts
replaced; earlier runs excluded,
tables regenerated.
VOID
Invalid evaluator
batches.
Earlier study: 627 readings by
an uncalibrated evaluator; 366
item readings with reversed
rubric (agreement 33.7%
aligned vs. 52.1% presented).
Quarantined; items rerun with
the corrected builder, later
frozen for the reported studies.
VOID
BOTH and NONE
merged as
“attenuation”.
Earlier study: 11 of 12
“net-zero” first drafts were
BOTH.
States never merged; d not used
to describe loss.
RETRACTED
UNKNOWN read
as inactive.
Earlier study: re-entry through
unknown gaps (one task 6/8 to
2/8). Exploratory: 368
uncertain requests coded “no
side”.
Re-entry needs a fully readable
gap; uncertain kept separate;
reported numbers use the
corrected analysis.
CORRECTED
Subset read as
propagation:
“63/64 (98.4%)”.
Earlier study: all 64 finals in the
subset were on the assigned
side.
Full table: 63/106 identical,
70/106 with zero states merged,
1/106 reversed; joint reading
only.
WITHDRAWN
Risk-rule lookup
with a wrong key.
Main study: three continuous
features always missing.
Corrected lock on the discovery
split.
UNCHANGED:
no rule
61


Original issue
Scope of impact
Current handling
Old conclusion
Route halt; static
field.
Harness: an unrelated HTTP
400 halted DeepSeek (1 attempt,
6 slots unstarted); one model
field is a constant.
400 logged as provider error,
attempt censored, not rerun; 6
slots run as first attempts;
identity from requests and
echoes.
RECLASSIFIED
Draft wording.
“Median increase” (a mean
difference); post hoc case rule
called fixed; 31/80 vs. 1/182
(different risk sets).
Median 5 to 49.5; rule labelled
post hoc; one risk set of 80 (49
OWN, 31 NONE, 0 OTHER).
CORRECTED
Monte Carlo p.
Initial study: frozen 6.3 × 10−4
(62/100,000) vs. exact
7.8 × 10−4.
Frozen value kept; T reproduced
from raw runs.
KEPT
Human-review
summaries.
“10 participants”, “72/72”, “two
raters agreed on 39”; the review
counts in Section 4.
Recomputed from sheets: 2
annotators, 94 cards, κ ≤0.025;
13-item audit, 2 reviewers + 1
adjudicator. Records matching
the Section 4 counts not located.
WITHDRAWN;
OPEN
Offered
capability read
as used.
Harness: delegation 0/80; saved
report = final (78/78, 79/79).
GPT reasoning: protocol
change.
Reported as untested or not
attributable; echoes do not verify
weights.
NOT TESTED
H.1
SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS
Coarse, partly readable measurement.
The instrument records whether a behavior expresses P,
Q, both, or neither for one registered factor; it does not measure amounts, thresholds, or degree of
fit, an unchanged state does not rule out finer changes, and unregistered factors are not read. The
pair score d codes BOTH and NONE alike as 0, and request and report scores do not share a scale.
Many comparisons are unreadable (62.7% of planned main-study final pairs are readable; Table 26);
UNKNOWN is never imputed, and fixed-plan ranges can be wide (H-D: [0.04, 0.99]; Table 27).
Evaluators never see the assignment, but a report’s text can reveal the user condition, and reads
capped at 30 items may omit items.
Short trajectories.
At the lowest reasoning setting, several model routes produce short executions
relative to the available budget, and public drafts are sparse. Consequently, fine-grained temporal
claims require opportunity-aware subsets rather than assuming every run provides comparable long-
horizon observations.
Reused tasks and dependence.
Some archived studies reuse tasks from earlier phases, so cross-
study agreement is not equivalent to replication on an untouched task holdout. Within-run requests,
factors, mirrored reads, and evaluator re-reads are dependent observations and are not counted as
independent executions.
AI evaluators and human scope.
All directional labels come from AI evaluators; mirrored reads
share one model’s biases, agreement across three families (Table 28) is not accuracy, and the auxiliary
evaluators’ reasoning setting (service default) was not recorded. Recovered human review covers
94 construction cards for the initial study and a 13-item audit of exploratory material (Appendix D);
these recovered records do not validate the later main-study, follow-up, or harness outputs, whose
archived factor cards were screened by AI reviewers. The author-reported expanded protocol and
proportionally scaled counts in Table 2 are a separate reporting layer.
Tested settings only.
The analyzed archive covers a finite set of model routes, reasoning settings,
retrieval infrastructure, and execution interfaces. The conclusions should not be extrapolated to
untested models, harnesses, languages, or interactive user settings.
Source data, consent, and privacy.
Tasks and profiles come from PDR-Bench (Liang et al., 2026b)
at the archived repository revision; its repository ships an Apache-2.0 file labelled as the code license
62


and describes the released profiles as authentic. The source paper describes informed consent and
de-identification of its profiles (Liang et al., 2026b); the local archive does not contain a separate
data-license or participant-consent document. We therefore distinguish the source authors’ description
from records independently available for this study. Counterfactual endpoints are constructed text,
not attributes of real persons. Our reviewers appear only under pseudonymous codes; records of their
consent procedure or compensation were not located.
63
