Title: Using Theory of Mind to Arbitrate between Social and Non-social Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28601v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 01:29:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Using Theory of Mind to Arbitrate between Social and Non-social Learning 

## Lance Ying 1,2,* , Ryan Truong 1,* , Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2, Samuel J. Gershman 1

> 1

Harvard University 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

Abstract 

Social learning is a powerful mechanism through which agents learn about the world from others. However, humans sometimes choose direct experience over social learning, which can carry time and cognitive resource costs. How do people balance social and non-social learning? We propose a Rational Mentalizing model of the decision to engage in social learning. This model estimates the utility of social learning by reasoning about another agent’s goal and the informativeness of their future actions. It then weighs the utility of social learning against the utility of non-social learning. Using a novel game where players choose between observing other agents or exploring the environment, we show that the Rational Mentalizing model can quantitatively capture human trade-offs between these strategies. These findings suggest that selective social learning is guided by ‘Theory of Mind’ in the service of utility maximization. 

Keywords: Social learning | Theory of Mind | Bayesian inference | Decision making | Computational modeling 

# 1 Introduction 

Social learning—acquiring information through others—is a powerful mechanism by which humans and non-human animals acquire information about the world [Henrich, 2016, Kendal et al., 2018]. Yet humans do not use social learning indiscriminately. We choose when to observe, how long to watch, and whom to learn from. Consider choosing a restaurant for dinner: you could browse on your own or follow where others go. But if other diners have different food preferences, following the crowd may not lead to the best outcome—many diners may be heading to a famous Italian restaurant while you are craving Asian food. To decide whether to follow others, you need to reason about whether their goals align with yours. This selectivity is central to the power of human social learning. At the core of this reasoning is Theory of Mind (ToM), the ability to attribute mental states such as goals and beliefs to other agents [Wellman and Lagattuta, 2004, Wellman, 2002]. Recent work in cognitive science has shown that ToM plays a crucial role in human teaching and learning [Gweon, 2021, Shafto et al., 2012, Hawkins et al., 2023, Dutemple et al., 2023]. These strategies enable learning from sparse, indirect data. Returning to the restaurant example, you might infer that your friend knows a good restaurant but is not hungry, or is hungry but does not know where to go; only by reasoning about both her knowledge and her goals can you decide whether to follow 

> ∗L.Y. and R.T. contributed equally to this work.

1arXiv:2607.28601v1 [cs.MA] 30 Jul 2026 her. You could also observe your knowledgeable friend when she is hungry so that you can use this information later when you are hungry yourself. In each case, the learner is not copying behavior but reasoning about the mental states that generated it. Existing computational accounts of social learning, however, bypass this generative view of the observed agent. Heuristic accounts characterize social learning in terms of simple policies; copy the majority, copy the successful, copy the prestigious [Laland, 2004, Rendell et al., 2011, Muthukrishna et al., 2016, Heyes, 2012], and have been productive in capturing regularities in animal and cross-cultural data, as well as in establishing that social learners enjoy efficiency advantages over purely individual learners [Kendal et al., 2005, Henrich, 2016]. Reinforcement learning accounts go further: rather than applying fixed copying rules, they let learners weight social information against individual information by each source’s estimated reliability, inferred from how volatile that source has been over time [Behrens et al., 2008, Diaconescu et al., 2020]. This logic has since been extended to advice-taking, norm learning, and feature-based reward learning [Biele et al., 2009, Pereg et al., 2024, Hertz, 2021, Schultner et al., 2025]. Yet both heuristic and reinforcement learning accounts share a blind spot: they treat observed behavior as a signal to be weighted, rather than as evidence about the goals and beliefs that produced it. As a consequence, they struggle to explain how humans learn efficiently from sparse, indirect observations, where the relevant inference is not what the other agent did but why they did it [Vélez and Gweon, 2021, Gweon, 2021, Bonawitz and Shafto, 2016]. Employing Theory of Mind for social learning comes with a cognitive cost relative to non-social learning. Thus, people may opt for non-social learning when these costs are too high relative to their expected benefits. Consistent with this hypothesis, Kendal et al. [2005] demonstrated that people are more likely to engage in social learning when the cost of non-social learning increases. More recently, Wu et al. [2025] showed, in an immersive collective foraging task, that humans adaptively modulate their reliance on social versus non-social cues as a function of environmental structure and recent foraging success. These and other studies focused on tasks where all agents pursue the same goal, so another agent’s success is by construction informative about the observer’s own rewards. In a collective sensing task used by Hawkins et al. [2023], for instance, once the observer can infer who has knowledge of the goal location, social learning tends to be less costly than non-social learning. In more realistic settings where agents have different goals, the value of observing another agent depends on whether their behavior is informative for the observer’s own objectives. Outside social learning specifically, a parallel literature on active information seeking has shown that humans rationally select queries based on expected information gain, balancing the value of new evidence against the cost of obtaining it [Oaksford and Chater, 1994, Markant and Gureckis, 2014, Coenen et al., 2019, Ruggeri et al., 2019]. This framework applied cleanly to non-social tasks-choosing which cards to flip, which experiments to run, and which hypotheses to test, but its extension to social sources is not simple. When the source is another agent, the informativeness of an observation depends on the agent’s goals and beliefs, not on a fixed query-answer mapping. A rational social learning agent must therefore combine the cost-benefit logic of active learning with a generative model of the agent being observed. We make two contributions. First, we propose a “Rational Mentalizing” model of social learning, grounded in the Bayesian Theory of Mind (BToM) framework [Baker et al., 2017, Jara-Ettinger, 2019, Ying et al., 2025]. BToM models other agents as rational planners and infers their goals and beliefs from observed actions [Baker et al., 2009, Zhi-Xuan et al., 2024, Ying et al., 2024, Stacy et al., 2021]. Our model extends this framework: the observer uses BToM not merely to understand another agent, but to estimate whether that understanding is worth the cost of obtaining it. The model weighs the expected utility of social learning—computed by mentalizing about other agents’ goals and plans—against the utility of non-social exploration, to decide if, when, and whom to observe. Second, we introduce a novel experimental paradigm in which participants navigate a 2Main Agent 

> Expert Agent
> Wizards
> Barriers
> Treasure Chest
> Novice Agent

Figure 1: Illustration of the social learning game. The participant controls the red (main) agent and must retrieve a target treasure chest. On each timestep, the participant can either observe a selected NPC (causing only that NPC to move) or act (moving the red agent one step). The map contains wizards (only one of each color holds the amulet), colored barriers, and treasure chests. The legend shows the main agent, expert NPCs, wizards, barriers, and treasure chests. multi-agent environment and must decide on each step whether to observe another agent or act independently. The game is designed to create rich, parametrically controllable trade-offs between social and non-social learning across varying levels of goal uncertainty, agent availability, and agent expertise. Across four experiments, we systematically vary the environment to create increasingly complex trade-offs. 

# 2 Social Learning Game 

The game takes place on a 12 x 11 grid map containing treasure chests, wizards, and colored barriers (Figure 1). Each treasure chest is either unobstructed or blocked by a colored barrier (e.g., red or blue). To pass through a barrier, a player must obtain an amulet of the matching color from a wizard. Among all wizards of a given color, only one holds the amulet while the rest are decoys. The number and placement of wizards varies across maps. In every experiment, a red agent is controlled by the human participant to reach one of the treasure chests. The red agent does not know which wizard has the amulet. In addition to the red agent, one or more other agents agents (non-player characters, or NPCs) are also present on the map. All agents can see each other’s positions, but each agent’s actions do not affect any other agent’s game state. Obtaining an amulet, passing through a barrier, or retrieving a chest has no effect on other agents’ ability to do the same. Each agent has a goal of retrieving a specific lettered treasure chest, but agents do not know each other’s goals. By default, NPCs know which 3wizard among a set of same-colored wizards holds the amulet (“expert” expertise). However, in one experimental condition (Experiment 4), one of the two observable NPCs lacks full knowledge of the map structure (“novice” expertise). At each timestep, the red player agent can either observe a chosen NPC or move one step in one of four cardinal directions: up, down, left, or right. If the agent chooses to observe, only the selected NPC moves one step while all other agents remain still. If the agent chooses to move, only the red agent moves and all other agents remain still. The red agent can also observe whenever an NPC interacts with a wizard, a barrier, or a treasure chest. Since the red player agent does not know which wizards possess amulets, it must weigh whether the information gained through observation is worth the cost of exploring on its own. We designed four experiments, each conducted as a separate study with distinct participants, that systematically vary the number of observable agents, treasure chests, and expertise levels (see Methods for full details). Experiment 1 uses a single expert NPC and a single treasure chest, isolating the basic trade-off between observing and exploring. Experiment 2 adds two additional treasure chests, introducing goal uncertainty. Experiment 3 adds a second expert NPC, requiring participants to choose whom to observe. Experiment 4 replaces one expert with a novice NPC, testing whether participants calibrate observation to agent expertise accordingly. 

# 3 Rational Mentalizing Model 

In this paper we propose a rational mentalizing model of social learning. The model performs a simple rational utility comparison at each timestep: is any information I gain by watching another agent worth more than what I would lose by not acting on my own goal? To do this, it estimates the utility of observing and acting, and choose the action with the higher estimated utility. First, Cself (bt), is the expected cost of committing now and executing the observer’s best plan under its current beliefs about the environment (e.g., which of the remaining wizards holds the amulet. The second, Qj

> obs

(t), is the expected cost of watching agent j for some number of steps and then acting. Computing Qj

> obs

(t) requires the observer to imagine, for each plausible hypothesis about what the watched agent wants and believes, how that agent’s future trajectory would refine the observer’s own beliefs and therefore reduce the cost of the observer’s eventual plan. Three ingredients make this possible (Figure 2): Bayesian inference over the observed agent’s goal and belief; simulation of how that agent’s future actions would narrow the observer’s candidate set; and a cost comparison between the resulting expected plan cost (plus time spent watching) and the cost of acting now. Two properties of this formulation matter for what follows. First, the observer does not need to know the other agent’s goal or belief, it only needs a posterior over them, which is updated by every action it observes. Second, the model naturally predicts whom to watch when multiple agents are available: the choice falls out of which agent’s hypothesized trajectory is expected to reduce the observer’s candidate set the most, per unit of observation steps. We now formalize these ideas. 

Cost Comparison At step t , the observer compares acting now against continuing to watch. Fix one hypothesis θji = ( gji , b ji ) (particle i) about the observed agent j’s goal and belief (for an expert NPC, the agent’s belief coincides with the true amulet location), with posterior probability pit. If that hypothesis were true, the observer can simulate forward and read off two things: T i, how many more steps of watching it would take before the agent’s trajectory narrows the remaining wizard to one (or reveals the hypothesis is wrong); and Ci

> plan

, the exploration cost the observer would still face afterward, over whatever candidates remain. The observer does not know which hypothesis is 4Figure 2: Schematic of the Rational Mentalizing model. At each timestep, the observer (red agent) decides whether to act or observe another agent. Utility comparison: it weights the cost of acting now ( Cself ) against the expected cost of watching the expert for another step ( Qobs ), and observes only when watching is cheaper. Theory of Mind: to establish that cost, the observer infers the observed agent’s goal and belief, for example whether it is heading to treasure A or B, and predicts how much observing would reduce its own uncertainty. 

Algorithm 1 Rational Mentalizing Model 

Require: Observer with beliefs bt; observable agents {j}; particles {(θji , p it)}Ni=1 for each agent j 

> 1:

while True do  

> 2:

Compute non-social learning cost: Cself (bt) 

> 3:

for each observable agent j do  

> 4:

for each particle i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } do  

> 5:

Simulate agent j’s future trajectory ˆajt:t+T under hypothesis θji 

> 6:

Compute updated beliefs b′ 

> t

from simulated trajectory  

> 7:

Estimate net cost: qi = cobs T i + Cplan (b′

> t

) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Aggregate: Qj

> obs

(t) = P 

> i

pitqi 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

if Cself (bt) ≤ Qj

> obs

(t) for all j then  

> 12:

Stop observing  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

Observe j∗ = arg min j Qj

> obs

(t) 

> 15:

Update posterior P (θj∗

| aj∗

> 1: t

) via Bayesian inverse planning  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

Act: Execute belief-space planner using final posterior P (g, b | a1: t)

5correct, so it marginalizes over its uncertainty: 

Qj

> obs

(t) = X

> i

pit

cobs T i + Ci

> plan

 . (1) Here cobs is the per-step cost of observing. Let j∗ = arg min j Qj

> obs

(t). If Qj∗

> obs

(t) < C self (bt), the observer watches agent j∗ for one step, updates on the realized action, and re-evaluates; otherwise it commits and acts. Observation pays off when the hypotheses disagree about how quickly the candidate set would be narrowed and what would remain uncertain afterward. 

Simulation and Belief Update Equation (1) leaves three quantities unspecified: the posterior weights pit and, under each hypothesis, the observation horizon T i and the residual planning cost 

Ci

> plan

. All three derive from a single generative model of the observed agent,a near-optimal planner whose actions reveal its goal and belief. We first describe how this model yields the posterior pit

(Eqs. 2–3), then how rolling it forward yields T i and Ci

> plan

.We model each observed agent j as a near-optimal planner in a partially observable environment [Zhi-Xuan et al., 2020, Baker et al., 2017]. The observer does not know the other agent’s goal 

gj (which treasure chest) or beliefs bj (which wizard holds the amulet). Under each goal-belief hypothesis θj = ( gj , b j ), the observed agent selects actions according to a Boltzmann policy over the cost-to-go Q∗(s, a | θj ) of an optimal planner: 

P (ajt | st, θ j ) = exp( −β Q ∗(st, a t | θj )) 

P 

> a′

exp( −β Q ∗(st, a ′ | θj )) . (2) where β is a temperature parameter controlling stochasticity. This soft-optimality assumption as-signs non-zero likelihood to suboptimal actions, enabling Bayesian inference from noisy observations. Given a sequence of observed actions aj

> 1: t

, the observer infers a joint posterior over the other agent’s goal and beliefs by inverting the forward model via Bayes’ rule: 

P (θj | aj

> 1: t

) ∝

> t

Y 

> τ=1

P (ajτ | sτ , θ j ) P (θj ). (3) Each hypothesis θj is scored by how well it explains the observed trajectory. Critically, the observer does not have access to j’s actual beliefs; bj is a latent variable inferred jointly with j’s goal. We represent the posterior using a particle filter derived from the Sequential Inverse Plan Search (SIPS) algorithm [Zhi-Xuan et al., 2020], which maintains a weighted set of particles {(θji , p it)}Ni=1 

and updates their weights with each observed action. These posteriors are precomputed for all observable trajectories and cached, then read during the decision process rather than recomputed online. These equations close the loop with Eq. (1). The posterior P (θj | aj

> 1: t

) supplies the weights 

pit. To obtain T i and Ci

> plan

, the observer rolls each particle θji forward under the same Boltzmann policy (Eq. 2), generating a simulated trajectory ˆajt:t+T : T i is the step at which this trajectory first narrows the observer’s candidate set to one (or contradicts the hypothesis), and Ci 

> plan

= Cplan (b′

> t

) is the observer’s exploration cost under the updated belief b′ 

> t

that incorporates the simulated trajectory. When the observer instead chooses to observe, it updates the posterior using the actual observed action and re-evaluates Eq. (1), and the decision process repeats. The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. Model parameters are fixed across experiments; values and sensitivity analyses are reported in the SI. 6Figure 3: Observation steps pooled across all four experiments. Each panel shows one model, with points colored by experiment. Pearson r and Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals are shown. The Rational Mentalizing model achieves the highest agreement with human observation behavior (CCC = 0 .89 ), while the alternative models show low concordance, indicating poor absolute agreement. 

# 4 Results 

We compared the full Rational Mentalizing model against three ablations, each removing one com-ponent of the full model. The Rational Observer weighs observation cost against exploration cost without reasoning about other’s goals or beliefs. The Mentalizing Observer reasons about other agents’ mental states but does not weigh social against non-social learning utility. The Naive Observer observes other agents indiscriminately, with no mentalizing or cost-benefit reasoning. 

## 4.1 Observation Behavior 

Across four experiments of progressively increasing complexity, the Rational Mentalizing model captured observation behavior with high fidelity (per-experiment r = 0 .90 -0.95 ; pooled CCC =0.89 ), while three ablations that each removed one component fitting substantially worse (Figure 3). The Mentalizing Observer (no utility estimation) tracked human behavior directionally but systematically over-observed. The Rational Observer (no mentalizing) and Naive Observer (neither) showed low concordance with human observation choices, particularly as task complexity increased. Human observation behavior was internally consistent across the four experiments. Split-half re-liability of observation counts ranged from rSB = 0 .83 to rSB = 0 .92 across experiments (Spearman-Brown corrected over 1000 random participant splits), establishing an upper bound on the fit any model could achieve against this data. We compared the four models against this ceiling on two metrics: the number of observation steps participants did per trial, and the total step counts (which depend on observation choices) serving as a downstream check. In Experiment 1 (single expert agent, single goal), the Rational Mentalizing model’s observation predictions correlated strongly with human behavior ( r = 0 .94 , CI [0 .86 , 0.98] ). The three alterna-tives showed lower agreement (Rational Observer r = 0 .66 , Naive Observer r = 0 .16 , Mentalizing Observer r = 0 .06) . The Mentalizing Observer’s correlation reflects its missing component: in three maps where the main agent began close to the available wizards, self-exploration was cheap relative to observation, and human and the Rational Mentalizing model accordingly skipped observation almost entirely (Figure 4, panel A.2) while the Mentalizing Observer continued to observe because it has no mechanism to weigh the observation cost against self-exploration. The same dissociation 7holds in panel A.1: when the expert’s path could quickly reveal the amulet, humans and the Ratio-nal Mentalizing model observed for only a few steps before acting independently, while the Rational and Naive Observers watched the full trajectory and the Mentalizing Observer over-observed by one step. In Experiment 2 (single expert agent, three goals - introducing goal uncertainty), the Rational Mentalizing model maintained strong agreement with human behavior ( r = 0 .91 , CI [0 .81 , 0.96] ). The three alternatives all fell well short (Rational Observer r = 0 .67 , Mentalizing Observer r =0.41 , CI [0 .10 , 0.73] , Naive Observer r = 0 .37 ). Goal uncertainty is now central: the expert’s trajectory carries information about both the amulet’s locations and the agent’s intended chest, and the observer must reason about both to decide whether continued watching is worthwhile. The Mentalizing Observer can do this reasoning but cannot weigh expected information gain against observation cost; the non-mentalizing alternatives cannot do it at all. Panels B.1 and B.2 illustrate the consequence: when the expert’s early movements were diagnostic of both its goal and the amulet location, the Rational Mentalizing model, like humans, observed briefly; when those movements were ambiguous, both observed longer, while the Rational and Naive Observers observed for a fixed duration regardless and the Mentalizing Observer over-observed by one step in B.1. Experiment 3 involved two expert agents and three goals, allowing us to evaluate how humans and models determined whom to observe. The Rational Mentalizing model captured human obser-vation patterns for both agents (agent 2: r = 0 .90 , CI [0 .86 , 0.96] ; agent 3: r = 0 .93 , CI [0 .87 , 0.96] ). All three alternatives fell short of the full model (Mentalizing Observer agent 2: r = 0 .47 , agent 3: r = 0 .27 ; Rational Observer agent 2: r = 0 .61 , agent 3: r = 0 .36 ; Naive Observer agent 2: 

r = 0 .40 , agent 3: r = 0 .25 ). This drop is the signature of the new inference introduced in this experiment: the observer must compare which of two agents’ future trajectories is expected to be more informative, weighed against the cost of watching either. The Naive and Rational Observers cannot make this comparison because they have no representation of the agents’ goals; the Men-talizing Observer can identify which agent might be more informative directionally but lacks the utility comparison to allocate observation accordingly. When one agent’s position made its future trajectory more informative about the amulet relevant to the observer’s goal, humans and the Ra-tional Mentalizing model concentrated observation on that agent while minimizing watching of the other, the Rational and Naive Observers observed both for a fixed duration, and the Mentalizing Observer over-observed the less-informative agent (Figure 4). Experiment 4 involved one expert and one novice agent, with three goals, allowing us to evaluate how humans and models calibrated their observing to varying expertise. The Rational Mentalizing model captured human observation of both agents (expert: r = 0 .90 , CI [0 .72 , 0.96] ; novice: r =0.95 , CI [0 .91 , 0.97] ). All three alternatives fit far worse than the full model (Mentalizing Observer expert: r = 0 .25 , novice: r = 0 .23 ; Rational Observer expert: r = 0 .57 , novice: r = 0 .33 ; Naive Observer expert: r = 0 .24 , novice: r = −0.41 ). Experiment 4 requires reasoning not only about an agent’s goal but also about how that agent updates its beliefs as it interacts with the environment. The Mentalizing Observer has the inferential engine to do this but no utility comparison to know when the resulting belief shift is worth the watching cost. The Rational and Naive Observers instead default (mostly) to the expert, a strategy that succeeds when the expert is in fact the more informative source, and fails when the novice’s behavior carries more counterfactual signal (Figure 4, D.1-D.2). In panel D.1 (sparse wizards, novice positioned near one), the novice’s continued trajectory after a wizard interaction reveals the amulets location in few observations, and humans and the Rational Mentalizing model accordingly observe the novice while alternatives default to the expert. In panel D.2 (many wizards, novice positioned closely to one of them), the same cue eliminates only a small fraction of hypotheses, and observation shifts to the expert; here the Mentalizing Observer flips and over-observes the novice, while the Rational and Naive Observers 8A.1 

# C.1 D.1 

# A.2 B.1 B.2 

# C.2 D.2   

> Exp 1 | Single Agent, Single Goal Exp 2 | Single Agent, Multiple Goals
> Exp 3 | Two Agents, Multiple Goals Exp 4 | Expert and Novice Agents, Multiple Goals

Figure 4: Qualitative examples of observation behavior across the four experiments. Each panel shows a trial map with agent trajectories and a bar chart comparing the number of observation steps for humans (H) and four models: Rational Mentalizing (RM), Mentalizing Observer (SM), Rational Observer (RN), and Naive Observer (N). Panels A.1–A.2: Experiment 1 (single agent, single goal). Panels B.1–B.2: Experiment 2 (single agent, multiple goals). Panels C.1–C.2: Experiment 3 (two expert agents, multiple goals), with separate observation counts for Agent 2 (blue) and Agent 3 (green). Panels D.1–D.2: Experiment 4 (expert and novice agents, multiple goals). Error bars indicate standard error across participants. 9Figure 5: Observation cost vs. execution cost (3 ×move + 5 ×interact), pooled across experiments; teal = human means, coral = model, with each panel’s fitted slope and its 95% bootstrap CI band. Humans show a positive coupling—more observation accompanies more execution. The Mentalizing and Naive Observers invert this relationship (negative slopes), whereas the full model and the Rational Observer recover positive slopes. Among these, the full model’s fit and confidence band overlap the human band most closely, the best qualitative match. coincide with the Rational Mentalizing model by defaulting to the expert by policy. Pooled across all experiments, the Rational Mentalizing model achieved Lin’s concordance cor-relational coefficient CCC = 0 .89 (CI [0 .84 , 0.92] ) on observation counts, while all three alternatives showed low concordance (CCC ≤ 0.21 ); the alternatives’ 95% bootstrap CIs do not overlap with the Rational Mentalizing model’s, showing reliable differences in absolute agreement. The Ra-tional Mentalizing model’s CCC approaches the upper bound implied by human inter-participant reliability ( rSB = 0 .83 -0.92 ), leaving little remaining systematic variance for any model to capture. The same pattern holds for the relationship between observation and execution (Figure 5). For humans, levels with more observation also involve more execution, a positive slope that only the Rational Mentalizing model reproduces. The Rational Observer recovers a weaker positive slope whose confidence interval includes zero, while the Mentalizing and Naive Observers invert it with negative slopes. 

# 5 Discussion 

We proposed and tested a Rational Mentalizing model of adaptive social learning. The model inte-grates two capacities, Bayesian Theory of Mind and rational cost-benefit analysis, that have been studied largely in isolation, into a unified framework for deciding whether, when, and whom to observe. Across four experiments that systematically varied the complexity of the social learning environment, the model quantitatively captured human observation behavior, substantially outper-forming three alternative models that each isolated on of it core components. The ablation analysis reveals that both components of the model are necessary, and that they fail in opposite directions when removed. The Mentalizing Observer model, which reasons about other agent’s mental states but does not weigh social learning against self-exploration, tends to over-observe: it continues observing agents even when the expected information gain does not justify the cost. The Rational Observer model, which performs cost-benefit analysis but does not reason about agents’ goals, cannot anticipate whether future observations will be informative, leading to under-observing when the immediate payoff is unclear. The Naive Observer fails on a different question, 10 the whom decision introduced in Experiments 3 and 4, where indiscriminate observation cannot recover. These patterns were especially pronounced in the observation count metric, which proved more diagnostic than total planning cost for distinguishing between models, a finding consistent with the idea that the decision of how much to observe, rather than overall task performance, is where human social learning is most distinctively rational. RL accounts of social learning have shown that humans dynamically arbitrate between social and individual information sources as a function of their relative reliability [Behrens et al., 2008, Diaconescu et al., 2020, Biele et al., 2009, Pereg et al., 2024, Hertz, 2021, Schultner et al., 2025]. Our results suggest that this arbitration is not based solely on signal reliability: human observers also adjust observation as a function of the inferred goal and beliefs of the source, observing more when another agent’s trajectory is expected to be informative for their own objectives and less when it is not. Capturing this requires representing the observed agent as a planning system, not as a noisy reward channel [Vélez and Gweon, 2021, Gweon, 2021] Heuristic accounts of social learning, which characterize observation as following fixed rules such as “copy the majority” or “copy the successful” [Laland, 2004, Rendell et al., 2011, Muthukrishna et al., 2016], similarly cannot accommodate the behavior we see here. A sharper comparison comes from utility based accounts developed in the same goal environment Kendal et al. [2005], Hawkins et al. [2023], and Wu et al. [2025] show that humans module reliance on social cues with foraging success and environmental structure, but in those tasks another agent’s success is by construction informative about the observer’s own rewards. Once goals diverge, as in Experiments 2–4, the value of observation cannot be read off the other agent’s outcomes; it must be computed by reasoning about whose goals make whose actions informative. The closest empirical precedent is Vélez and Gweon [2019], who showed that learners integrate advice with private knowledge by inferring the process that generated it-recovering how an advisor selects advice rather than merely tracking its reliability. We share this posterior-inference logic but apply it where their paradigm doesn’t reach: the observer learns from another agent’s costly, goal-directed actions-not cooperative advice about a shared payoff-within a sequential decision problem, so that what the source’s behavior reveals depends on first inferring goals that may differ from the observer’s own. A separate strand of cognitive science has examined how learners selectively trust some sources over others. Children and adults preferentially learn from sources judged to be more accurate, knowledgeable, or expert [Koenig and Harris, 2005, Harris, 2012, Sperber et al., 2010], with this selectivity sensitive to source cues such as accuracy track records and explicit knowledge attribution. Experiment 4 suggests that humans calibrate observation not to expertise as a static property of an agent but to the expected informativeness of that agent’s behavior in the current environment: across two map structures, the agent humans preferred to observe reversed. In our model, this calibration is not a separate trust mechanism but a consequence of mentalizing. An agent whose belief state is uncertain produces actions whose informativeness is itself a function of that uncertainty, and the rational arbitration absorbs this directly into the cost of observation. Selective trust and selective observation may then be products of a unified Bayesian inference over agent models rather than distinct cognitive systems. The Rational Mentalizing model closely captures the qualitative pattern of human observation, tracking how often people choose to observe across conditions, but it underpredicts how much they do so. The same holds for total steps taken: the model reproduces the relative pattern across conditions while systematically underpredicting the absolute amount across all four experiments. In both cases, humans observe and move more than the model predicts. The gap is concentrated in scenarios where the model commits cleanly to a single information source while humans maintain a small but non-zero rate of observation of the alternative agent. This residual observation suggests participants hedge beyond what the rational arbitration prescribes, perhaps reflecting uncertainty 11 in their own model of other agents, a softer-than-argmax decision, or curiosity-driven monitoring. Three further questions remain open. First, our model treats observation as the only social channel; real social learning includes communication, demonstration, and pedagogical intent, where the observed agent optimized their actions for the observer rather than for their own goal [Shafto et al., 2014, Gweon, 2021, Bonawitz et al., 2011, Bridgers et al., 2020]. Extending the framework to those channels is not trivial. Second, the model treats each trial as independent and does not represent how humans accumulate agent-specific priors across repeated interactions. In real social learning, observers accumulate histories of which agents tend to be informative or trustworthy, and these histories shape future observation choices [Koenig and Harris, 2005, Harris, 2012]. Third, the model captures how observation varies across conditions but consistently predicts less of it than people actually do: across all four experiments, humans observe and move more than the rational account prescribes. This gap suggests that observation is driven partly by factors the model omits, such as intrinsic information-seeking or curiosity that is not tied to instrumental payoff [Gottlieb et al., 2013, Kidd and Hayden, 2015], or a conservative tendency to gather more evidence than a reward-maximizing planner would require. This characterization acts as a next step. In conclusion, we have argued that previous models of selective social learning fall short be-cause they do not fully exploit Theory of Mind in combination with utility maximization. The Rational Mentalizing model formalizes this idea, thereby gaining the power to learn from sparse, indirect social observation (e.g., from agents with different goals and/or beliefs). Our experiments demonstrate that this model can quantitatively and qualitatively match human behavior in a com-plex social learning game, taking us one step closer to a more complete theory of human social intelligence. 

# 6 Methods 

## 6.1 Experimental Conditions 

Experiment 1: Single Agent, Single Goal Experiment 1 uses a two-agent setting: a red agent (the participant) and a blue expert NPC with full knowledge of amulet locations, who takes the optimal path to its goal. The map contains a single treasure chest. The red agent can observe the blue agent’s movements to infer which blue wizard holds the blue amulet. 

Experiment 2: Single Agent, Multiple Goals Experiment 2 retains the two-agent setting from Experiment 1 but introduces three treasure chests instead of one, adding goal uncertainty. The blue agent’s movements now become informative about both amulet locations and the blue agent’s intended goal. 

Experiment 3: Two Agents, Multiple Goals Experiment 3 extends the two-agent setup to a three-agent setting, adding a green agent. The red agent must now decide not only whether to observe but which NPC to observe at each timestep—only the selected agent moves during an observation step, while the unselected agent remains still. Both the blue and green agents are experts with full knowledge of their respective amulet locations. 

Experiment 4: Expert and Novice Agents, Multiple Goals Experiment 4 retains the three-agent, three-chest structure from Experiment 3 but varies the NPCs’ experience levels. Each NPC is designated as either an expert or a novice , and the red agent is informed of these designations before each trial. An expert agent has full knowledge of the amulet locations and takes the optimal 12 path to its goal. A novice agent, like the red agent, does not know which wizard holds the amulet. When a novice’s goal is blocked by a blue barrier, it approaches the nearest blue wizard, repeating this process until it obtains the blue amulet, and only then proceeds optimally to its goal. Ad-ditionally, unlike in previous experiments, notifications about NPC–wizard interactions no longer reveal whether the wizard gave an amulet, further reducing the information available from passive observation. Together, these manipulations allow us to test whether participants calibrate their social learning to the perceived informativeness of each agent. 

## 6.2 Participants 

All experiments were conducted on Prolific. We recruited 321 US participants across four separate studies: Experiment 1 ( N = 57 ; mean age = 44 .7, SD = 12 .2; 23 female, 34 male), Experiment 2 (N = 104 ; mean age = 41 .2, SD = 11 .9; 41 female, 61 male, 2 non-binary), Experiment 3 ( N = 80 ;mean age = 42 .6, SD = 13 .3; 37 female, 43 male), and Experiment 4 ( N = 80 ; mean age = 42 .4,

SD = 12 .0; 49 female, 31 male). Participants were paid $10 per hour, with performance bonuses increasing compensation to $12 per hour. Participants gave informed consent, and the Harvard University Committee on the Use of Human Subjects approved the experiment. We applied a participant-level quality filter based on the point system described in the Procedure. Each participant’s total score was computed as the sum of unspent points across all non-tutorial levels. Participants whose total score fell below Q1 − 1.5 × IQR were excluded as outliers, where 

Q1 is the first quartile (computed by linear interpolation) and IQR is the interquartile range of the score distribution within each experiment. This excluded 4 participants from Experiment 1, 10 from Experiment 2, 2 from Experiment 3, and 7 from Experiment 4, yielding final samples of 53, 94, 78, and 73 participants, respectively. Split-half reliability of the observation data was assessed using 1000 random participant splits with Spearman-Brown correction; for the two experiments with multiple observed agents (Experiments 3 and 4), observation counts were stacked across observed agents. This yielded high reliability across all experiments: Experiment 1, rSB = 0 .92 ; Experiment 2, rSB = 0 .83 ; Experiment 3, rSB = 0 .85 ; Experiment 4, rSB = 0 .86 .

## 6.3 Procedure 

To mimic the cost structure of real-world social and non-social learning, each action carries a point cost: movement costs 3 points per step, interacting with a wizard costs 5 points, and observing another agent costs 1 point per step. Agents navigate the grid to collect lettered treasure chests, but colored barriers block access to certain chests. To pass a barrier, an agent must first obtain a matching-colored amulet from the correct wizard. Among all wizards of a given color, only one holds the amulet while the rest are decoys. Each trial begins with a fixed point budget; participants keep any unspent points, and their cumulative remaining points across all trials determined a performance bonus (up to $2 additional compensation). This incentive structure encourages participants to minimize total cost—balancing the cheap but potentially wasteful strategy of prolonged observation against the expensive but direct strategy of independent exploration. Each participant completed 10 trials presented in one of several pre-randomized orderings, to offset ordering effects. These orderings were also designed so that no two trials shared a similar structure (e.g., none of the maps across the 10 trials were identical). The initial point budget for each level was set by computing the optimal-path cost for the main agent, adding a 20-point buffer, and rounding up to the nearest 5 points. 13 6.4 Model Implementation 

The Rational Mentalizing model is implemented in Julia, using the PDDL.jl and SymbolicPlanners.jl 

libraries for planning and the InversePlanning.jl library with Gen.jl particle filters for Bayesian inference. 

Belief Representation The observer maintains a belief distribution over which wizard holds the amulet. For each blue wizard, we create a hypothesis state in which that wizard holds the blue amulet. The prior is uniform over all blue wizards. As the observer watches another agent interact with wizards, hypotheses inconsistent with the observed outcomes are pruned, and the belief distribution is updated accordingly. 

Inverse Planning We pre-compute the posterior distributions over goals and belief states using the Sequential Inverse Plan Search (SIPS) algorithm [Zhi-Xuan et al., 2020] implemented via Gen.jl 

particle filters. For each map and scenario, we store two probability tables: P (g | ao

> 1: t

), the posterior over the observed agent’s goal at each timestep, and P (b | ao

> 1: t

, g ), the posterior over belief states conditioned on each goal hypothesis. A state hypothesis is considered converged when its posterior probability exceeds 0.95 , and goal or state hypotheses with posterior probability below 0.1 are pruned from consideration. Rather than drawing a fixed number of samples, the filter places one particle on each goal-belief hypothesis, stratified over the candidate goals and belief states, so the discrete hypothesis space is enumerated exhaustively rather than approximated by sampling. All model parameters were set a priori , held identical across all four experiments, and never fit to human behavior: the planning temperature was β = 0 .5; the model’s per-step action costs matched those faced by participants (movement 3, wizard interaction 5, observation cobs = 1 points); and the convergence and pruning thresholds were 0.95 and 0.1, respectively. 

Self-Exploration Cost The cost of non-social learning, Cself (bt), is estimated by a greedy planner that visits the candidate blue wizards in order of distance from the observer’s current position, checking each in turn before continuing to the goal. Writing w(1) , . . . , w (K) for the K wizards consistent with belief b in nearest-first order, 

Cself (b) = 

> K

X

> k=1

 d(xk−1, w (k)) + cint 

 + d(xK , x g),

where x0 is the observer’s current cell, xk its cell after interacting with w(k), xg its goal cell, d(·, ·)

the A ∗ path cost under a Manhattan heuristic ( GoalManhattan ), and cint the interaction cost. The same function, evaluated on the candidate set that remains after observation, supplies the residual planning cost in Eq. (1): Ci 

> plan

= Cself (bT i ). Plans are cached by a state-signature key to avoid recomputation. 

Observation Utility At each timestep, the observer estimates the expected cost of observing each available agent j. For each particle i (a goal-belief hypothesis (gi, b i)) with non-negligible posterior probability, the model looks up the convergence time T i, the number of future observation steps until the belief posterior concentrates on a single wizard, together with the candidate set that remains at convergence. The expected observation cost for agent j is the posterior-weighted average of these per-hypothesis costs, 

Qj

> obs

(t) = X

> i

pit

cobs T i + Ci

> plan

, (4) 14 identical to Eq. (1); here each particle i carries weight pit ∝ P (gi | a1: t) P (bi | a1: t, g i), the joint goal-belief posterior renormalized over the retained hypotheses; T i is the number of remaining observation steps until convergence; and the residual cost Ci 

> plan

= Cself (bT i ) is the self-exploration cost above, evaluated on the candidates that remain at convergence. Writing j∗ = arg min j Qj

> obs

(t)

for the cheapest agent to watch, the observer then 

at =

(observe j∗, if Qj∗

> obs

(t) < C self (bt),

act , otherwise. In the multi-agent setting (Experiments 3–4), the expected costs for all observable agents are com-puted in parallel. 

## 6.5 Alternative Model Implementations 

Rational Observer (No Mentalizing) This model weighs the cost of self-exploration against the cost of observing for a fixed duration, but does not reason about the other agent’s goals or beliefs. It computes two quantities: (1) Cself (bt), the cost of the observer’s greedy exploration over all blue wizards (as above), and (2) Qobs = cobs · T + Cself (bT ), where T is the number of steps until the other agent’s first wizard interaction and Cself (bT ) is the observer’s exploration cost once it gains full information after observing. If Qobs < C self (bt), the agent observes for T steps; otherwise, it skips observation entirely. The decision is binary and made once at the start of each trial. 

Mentalizing Observer (No Utility Estimation) This model uses Theory of Mind to infer the other agent’s goal and belief posteriors but does not evaluate the utility of either social or non-social learning. At each timestep t, the observer checks whether, under any plausible goal-state hypothesis, the observed agent’s future trajectory could reduce uncertainty about the latent state—specifically, whether observing further would help identify which wizard holds the amulet. The observer compares the current belief state distribution to the predicted distributions under each hypothesis using a distance metric. Formally, the agent continues observing as long as there exists a future horizon over which the state posterior is expected to diverge from the current posterior: 

d P (bmt ), P (bmt | aot:t+T , g, i ) > ϵ (5) for at least one (g, i ) pair with sufficient probability, where d(·, ·) is the Euclidean distance between belief distributions and ϵ is a threshold. The agent stops observing when the observed agent’s trajectory is no longer expected to be informative under any plausible hypothesis—for example, when the observer infers that the agent is pursuing a different goal and its future path will not reveal the amulet location. When two agents are available (Experiments 3–4), the Mentalizing Observer alternates between them, observing each in turn until one yields the needed information or neither is expected to provide further useful observations. 

Naive Observer The Naive Observer observes the available expert agents until each first interacts with a wizard of the relevant color, at which point it assumes that wizard holds the amulet. This model involves no belief updating, no inference about mental states, and no cost-benefit reasoning. For each expert, we compute its optimal plan and identify the timestep at which it first interacts with a blue wizard, and the Naive Observer observes that agent for exactly that many steps. With a single expert (Experiments 1–2) it observes that agent alone; with two experts (Experiment 3) it observes both, alternating between them until each reaches its first wizard interaction. In Experiment 4, where an expert and a novice NPC are present, the Naive Observer observes only the expert, ignoring the novice entirely. 15 References 

Chris L Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Action understanding as inverse planning. 

Cognition , 113(3):329–349, 2009. Chris L Baker, Julian Jara-Ettinger, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Rational quantitative attribution of beliefs, desires and percepts in human mentalizing. Nature Human Behaviour , 1 (4):1–10, 2017. Timothy EJ Behrens, Laurence T Hunt, Mark W Woolrich, and Matthew FS Rushworth. Associative learning of social value. Nature , 456(7219):245–249, 2008. doi: 10.1038/nature07538. Guido Biele, Jörg Rieskamp, and Richard Gonzalez. Computational models for the combination of advice and individual learning. Cognitive Science , 33(2):206–242, 2009. doi: 10.1111/j.1551-6709. 2009.01010.x. Elizabeth Bonawitz and Patrick Shafto. Computational models of development, social influences. 

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 7:95–100, 2016. Elizabeth Bonawitz, Patrick Shafto, Hyowon Gweon, Noah D Goodman, Elizabeth Spelke, and Laura Schulz. The double-edged sword of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition , 120(3):322–330, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.001. Sophie Bridgers, Julian Jara-Ettinger, and Hyowon Gweon. Young children consider the expected utility of others’ learning to decide what to teach. Nature Human Behaviour , 4(2):144–152, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41562-019-0748-6. Anna Coenen, Jonathan D Nelson, and Todd M Gureckis. Asking the right questions about the psychology of human inquiry: Nine open challenges. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 26(5): 1548–1587, 2019. doi: 10.3758/s13423-018-1470-5. Andreea Oliviana Diaconescu, Madeline Stecy, Lars Kasper, Christopher J Burke, Zoltan Nagy, Christoph Mathys, and Philippe N Tobler. Neural arbitration between social and individual learning systems. eLife , 9:e54051, 2020. doi: 10.7554/eLife.54051. Elizabeth Dutemple, Hanifa Hakimi, and Diane Poulin-Dubois. Do I know what they know? link-ing metacognition, theory of mind, and selective social learning. Journal of experimental child psychology , 227:105572, 2023. Jacqueline Gottlieb, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Manuel Lopes, and Adrien Baranes. Information-seeking, curiosity, and attention: computational and neural mechanisms. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 (11):585–593, 2013. Hyowon Gweon. Inferential social learning: Cognitive foundations of human social learning and teaching. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 25(10):896–910, 2021. Paul L Harris. Trusting What You’re Told: How Children Learn From Others . Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2012. Robert D Hawkins, Andrew M Berdahl, Alex ‘Sandy’ Pentland, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Noah D Goodman, and PM Krafft. Flexible social inference facilitates targeted social learning when rewards are not observable. Nature Human Behaviour , 7(10):1767–1776, 2023. 16 Joseph Henrich. The Secret of Our Success . Princeton University Press, 2016. Uri Hertz. Learning how to behave: cognitive learning processes account for asymmetries in adap-tation to social norms. Proceedings of the Royal Society B , 288(1952):20210293, 2021. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2021.0293. Cecilia Heyes. What’s social about social learning? Journal of comparative psychology , 126(2): 193–202, 2012. Julian Jara-Ettinger. Theory of mind as inverse reinforcement learning. Current Opinion in Behav-ioral Sciences , 29:105–110, 2019. Rachel L Kendal, Isabelle Coolen, Yfke van Bergen, and Kevin N Laland. Trade-offs in the adaptive use of social and asocial learning. Advances in the Study of Behavior , 35:333–379, 2005. Rachel L Kendal, Neeltje J Boogert, Luke Rendell, Kevin N Laland, Mike Webster, and Patricia L Jones. Social learning strategies: Bridge-building between fields. Trends in cognitive sciences , 22 (7):651–665, 2018. Celeste Kidd and Benjamin Y Hayden. The psychology and neuroscience of curiosity. Neuron , 88 (3):449–460, 2015. Melissa A Koenig and Paul L Harris. Preschoolers mistrust ignorant and inaccurate speakers. Child Development , 76(6):1261–1277, 2005. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00849.x. Kevin N Laland. Social learning strategies. Learning & Behavior , 32(1):4–14, 2004. Douglas B Markant and Todd M Gureckis. Is it better to select or to receive? learning via active and passive hypothesis testing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 143(1):94–122, 2014. doi: 10.1037/a0032108. Michael Muthukrishna, Thomas JH Morgan, and Joseph Henrich. The when and who of social learning and conformist transmission. Evolution and Human Behavior , 37(1):10–20, 2016. Mike Oaksford and Nick Chater. A rational analysis of the selection task as optimal data selection. 

Psychological Review , 101(4):608–631, 1994. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.101.4.608. Maayan Pereg, Uri Hertz, Ido Ben-Artzi, and Nitzan Shahar. Disentangling the contribution of individual and social learning processes in human advice-taking behavior. npj Science of Learning ,9(1):4, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41539-024-00214-0. Luke Rendell, Laurel Fogarty, William JE Hoppitt, Thomas JH Morgan, Mike M Webster, and Kevin N Laland. Cognitive culture: theoretical and empirical insights into social learning strate-gies. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 15(2):68–76, 2011. Azzurra Ruggeri, Nora Swaboda, Zi Lin Sim, and Alison Gopnik. Shake it baby, but only when needed: Preschoolers adapt their exploratory strategies to the information structure of the task. 

Cognition , 193:104013, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2019.104013. David Schultner, Lucas Molleman, and Björn Lindström. Feature-based reward learning shapes human social learning strategies. Nature Human Behaviour , 9:2183–2198, 2025. doi: 10.1038/ s41562-025-02269-4. 17 Patrick Shafto, Noah D Goodman, and Michael C Frank. Learning from others: The consequences of psychological reasoning for human learning. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7(4):341–351, 2012. Patrick Shafto, Noah D Goodman, and Thomas L Griffiths. A rational account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by, and learning from, examples. Cognitive psychology , 71:55–89, 2014. Dan Sperber, Fabrice Clément, Christophe Heintz, Olivier Mascaro, Hugo Mercier, Gloria Origgi, and Deirdre Wilson. Epistemic vigilance. Mind & Language , 25(4):359–393, 2010. doi: 10.1111/ j.1468-0017.2010.01394.x. Stephanie Stacy, Chenfei Li, Minglu Zhao, Yiling Yun, Qingyi Zhao, Max Kleiman-Weiner, and Tao Gao. Modeling communication to coordinate perspectives in cooperation. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 43, 2021. Natalia Vélez and Hyowon Gweon. Integrating incomplete information with imperfect advice. Topics in Cognitive Science , 11(2):299–315, 2019. doi: 10.1111/tops.12388. Natalia Vélez and Hyowon Gweon. Learning from other minds: an optimistic critique of reinforce-ment learning models of social learning. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 38:110–115, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.01.006. Henry M Wellman. Understanding the psychological world: Developing a theory of mind. In Usha Goswami, editor, Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development , pages 167–187. Blackwell, 2002. Henry M Wellman and Kristin H Lagattuta. Theory of mind for learning and teaching: The nature and role of explanation. Cognitive development , 19(4):479–497, 2004. Charley M Wu, Dominik Deffner, Benjamin Kahl, Björn Meder, Mark K Ho, and Ralf H J M Kurvers. Adaptive mechanisms of social and asocial learning in immersive collective foraging. 

Nature Communications , 16(1):3539, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-58365-6. Lance Ying, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Lionel Wong, Vikash Mansinghka, and Joshua Tenenbaum. Grounding language about belief in a Bayesian theory-of-mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10416, 2024. Lance Ying, Ryan Truong, Katherine M Collins, Cedegao E Zhang, Megan Wei, Tyler Brooke-Wilson, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Lionel Wong, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Language-informed synthe-sis of rational agent models for grounded theory-of-mind reasoning on-the-fly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16755, 2025. Tan Zhi-Xuan, Jordyn Mann, Tom Silver, Josh Tenenbaum, and Vikash Mansinghka. Online Bayesian goal inference for boundedly rational planning agents. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 33, 2020. Tan Zhi-Xuan, Lance Ying, Vikash Mansinghka, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Pragmatic instruction following and goal assistance via cooperative language-guided inverse planning. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , 2024. 18 Appendix A Supplementary Information 

This supplement provides per-experiment breakdowns of the analyses pooled in the main text, the model’s reproduction of total and component costs, and the model parameters. All methods are described in the main text. 

## A.1 Task workflow 

Before the main task, participants completed a short guided tutorial. Figure A1 shows representative instruction screens and the game interface, and Figure A3 illustrates the two action types—observing another agent and moving—each as a before/after state transition. 

## A.2 Stimuli 

Each experiment used a pool of grid maps (all 12 × 11 cells); each participant completed 10 trials drawn from the pool. A base map can appear in two scenarios that share its layout but differ in the NPC goal assignments (and, in Experiment 4, agent expertise), which changes what each agent’s path reveals. Table A1 summarizes the set, and Figures A4–A11 show every configuration with its agents’ reference paths (scenario pairs are shown adjacently, labelled s1 /s2 ). All maps and reference paths are also available in the repository. Table A1: Stimulus inventory. All maps are 12 × 11 grids; each participant completed 10 trials drawn from the experiment’s pool. “Scenarios” share a base map’s layout but differ in NPC goal assignments (and, in Experiment 4, agent expertise). Counts are the configurations entering the analyses (shown in full in Figs. A4–A11). Experiment Base maps Scenarios/map Configs NPC agents Goal chests 1 (single agent, single goal) 20 1 20 1 expert 12 (single agent, multiple goals) 24 2 48 1 expert 33 (two agents, multiple goals) 20 2 40 2 experts 34 (expert + novice, multiple goals) 20 2 40 1 expert + 1 novice 3Total 84 — 148 Table A2: Model parameters. All values were set a priori and shared across Experiments 1–4; none were fit to human data. Parameter Symbol Value Planning (Boltzmann) temperature β 0.5

Movement cost 3 points Wizard-interaction cost cint 5 points Observation cost cobs 1 point State-convergence threshold 0.95 

Hypothesis-pruning threshold 0.1

Belief-divergence threshold (Mentalizing Observer) ϵ 0.1

Goal–belief hypotheses one particle per (g, b ) pair (exhaustive) Self-exploration planner A∗ with Manhattan heuristic 19 Figure A1: Task instructions. Top: the welcome screen and game interface—the participant’s goal and remaining points, the grid map with the main (red) agent, expert/novice NPCs, wizards, colored barriers, and lettered treasure chests, and the action panel. Bottom: a tutorial screen contrasting an expert’s and a novice’s path to the same goal (the novice checks multiple wizards to find the amulet). 20 Figure A2: Game interface. A single trial as the participant sees it: the Game Info panel (current goal, remaining points, and each NPC’s expertise), the grid map (red M, the participant; expert/novice NPCs; color-coded wizards; colored barriers; lettered treasure chests), and the Actions 

panel (four movement actions and an Observe button for each NPC, with per-step point costs). 21 5

# 5Figure A3: Example actions. Top (observing): choosing to observe an agent advances only that agent while the participant stays in place; here five observation steps (1 point each) lead the observed agent to interact with a wizard. Bottom (moving): choosing a movement action moves the participant’s own (red) agent; here five Left steps (3 points each). 22 Figure A4: Experiment 1 stimuli (single expert, single goal). Every trial map with the expert’s reference path. Red M, participant; blue E, expert NPC; arrows, path; hexagons, color-coded amulets; lettered chest, goal. Panels are labelled by map ID. 23 Figure A5: Experiment 2 stimuli (1 of 3) (single expert, multiple goals). Every configuration with the expert’s reference path; scenario pairs ( s1 /s2 ) are adjacent and differ in the expert’s goal. 24 Figure A6: Experiment 2 stimuli (2 of 3). Continued from Fig. A5. 25 Figure A7: Experiment 2 stimuli (3 of 3). Continued from Fig. A5. 26 Figure A8: Experiment 3 stimuli (1 of 2) (two experts, multiple goals). Every configuration with both NPCs’ reference paths (blue and green); scenario pairs ( s1 /s2 ) are adjacent. 27 Figure A9: Experiment 3 stimuli (2 of 2). Continued from Fig. A8. 28 Figure A10: Experiment 4 stimuli (1 of 2) (expert and novice, multiple goals). Every config-uration with the expert’s (blue) and novice’s (green) reference paths; the novice’s path may check several wizards before finding the amulet. Scenario pairs ( s1 /s2 ) are adjacent. 29 Figure A11: Experiment 4 stimuli (2 of 2). Continued from Fig. A10. 30 Figure A12: Observation cost, Experiments 1–2 (single observed agent), human vs. model. Rows: Experiment 1; Experiment 2. Columns: the four models, each with Pearson r, 95% bootstrap CI, Lin’s CCC, RMSE, and MAE. 31 Figure A13: Observation cost, Experiments 3–4 , split by observed agent. Rows: Experiment 3 (agent 2); Experiment 3 (agent 3); Experiment 4 (agent 2); Experiment 4 (agent 3). Columns and statistics as in Fig. A12. Unlike total cost (Fig. A14), observation cost separates the models: only the Rational Mentalizing model matches it. 32 Figure A14: Total cost , human vs. model, by experiment (rows) and model (columns), with Pearson 

r, Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient (CCC), RMSE, and MAE. All four models reproduce total cost well, showing that overall cost is not diagnostic for distinguishing them. 33 Figure A15: Observation–execution trade-off by experiment (rows) and model (columns). Teal: human; coral: model; lines are fitted slopes. The positive human slope, and the full model’s match to it, hold within every experiment. 34 A.3 Data and Code Availability 

The behavioral game, the Rational Mentalizing model and the three ablation implementations, the anonymized human data, and all analysis and plotting code are available at https://osf. io/e93kh/ . The model is implemented in Julia using the PDDL.jl , SymbolicPlanners.jl , and 

InversePlanning.jl libraries with Gen.jl particle filters; analyses and figures are produced with the Python scripts in the same repository. 35