Title: Conditional Graph Diffusion for Negotiation Support: Overcoming Discrete Infeasibility and Preference Elicitation Gaps

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.02209v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:44:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Conditional Graph Diffusion for Negotiation Support: Overcoming Discrete Infeasibility and Preference Elicitation Gaps 

Moirangthem Tiken Singh 

> Department of Computer Science and Engineering, DUIET, Dibrugarh University

Abstract 

Traditional bilateral negotiation support systems search over discrete allocation spaces. This approach encounters structural infeasibility when no discrete outcome satisfies individual rationality. It also fails to incorporate preference signals embedded in natural language dialogue. This study introduces the Condi-tional Graph Diffusion (CGD) framework, which addresses these limitations by generating recommenda-tions in a continuous bilateral utility space. A GATv2 encoder captures comparative bilateral preference structure through dynamic attention. A cross-attention mechanism fuses these strategic embeddings with transformer-based dialogue representations into a unified conditioning context for a denoising diffusion probabilistic model. An analytically derived normative guidance gradient is applied at inference time. It injects per-step monotonic corrections at each reverse diffusion step, steering generation toward individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability without model retraining. Evaluation across synthetic, CaSiNo, and Deal or No Deal corpora confirms that accumulated corrections achieve an individual ra-tionality rate of at least 0.997, a security gap of at most 0.009, and a symmetry gap within the 0.15 equitability threshold. Relative to the Nash Bargaining Solution, CGD reduces security gaps by up to 70-fold at a welfare cost of at most 3%. An ablation study confirms that naive constraint minimiza-tion without a learned generative prior fails normative compliance across heterogeneous corpora, failing individual rationality on Deal or No Deal and violating equitability on CaSiNo. A controlled misrepre-sentation experiment confirms the architectural capacity of cross-attention fusion to exploit informative dialogue signals, identifying pre-trained encoder integration as the primary direction for future work. An inference-time welfare guidance mechanism decouples normative compliance from welfare maximiza-tion within a single pipeline, recovering Pareto efficiency on CaSiNo without retraining while strictly preserving individual rationality. 

Keywords: negotiation support systems; conditional diffusion models; graph attention networks; normative compliance; bilateral utility optimization; inference-time guidance 

1. Introduction 

Negotiation is a high-stakes decision-making process in economic and organizational systems. Two agents divide indivisible resources under incomplete information, which precludes a jointly optimal al-location. A negotiation support system (NSS) acts as a neutral recommender that proposes allocations satisfying individual rationality (IR), procedural security, equity, and Pareto efficiency [1]. Existing automated negotiation systems fail to satisfy all four criteria simultaneously. This limitation has consequences for applications such as supply chain contracting, multiparty procurement, and humani-  

> Email address: tiken.m@dibru.ac.in (Moirangthem Tiken Singh)
> arXiv:2606.02209v1 [cs.GT] 1 Jun 2026

tarian logistics. The rejection of a recommendation or an inequitable outcome can terminate negotiations entirely. The Nash Bargaining Solution (NBS) [2] provides a canonical analytical framework. It selects the allocation maximizing the Nash product under individual rationality constraints. However, the NBS ad-dresses only individual rationality and Pareto efficiency by design. It provides no mechanism for enforcing security proximity, the requirement that each agent receives at least its proportional-share reference utility, or equitability, the requirement that the utility difference between agents remains bounded. Empirical evaluation confirms that NBS recommendations violate security proximity substantially on real-world corpora even when individual rationality is satisfied. Beyond this, the NBS inherits three structural limitations from its discrete-allocation formulation. It is undefined when no allocation satisfies both agents’ reservation utilities. It conditions only on declared values, ignoring the preference signals embedded in negotiation dialogue [3, 4]. Its exhaustive search over feasible allocations also grows exponentially with the number of issues [5]. Recent approaches address subsets of these limitations. Reinforcement learning agents [3, 6] incor-porate dialogue signals but optimize unilateral rewards and cannot guarantee bilateral individual ratio-nality. Large language model agents [7, 8] exploit conversational context but treat normative constraints as prompt-level rules, providing no formal guarantees. Diffusion-based planners [9, 10] operate in con-tinuous spaces and support constraint integration but address single-agent processes and do not enforce bilateral criteria. No prior system simultaneously guarantees individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability on real-world dialogue corpora. This study introduces the CGD framework to address these limitations within a unified generative architecture. CGD encodes bilateral preference structures using a graph attention encoder that captures the relational comparison between agent preferences. This representation is fused with a dialogue encoder through cross-attention. A denoising diffusion probabilistic model [11] then generates recommendations in the continuous bilateral utility space. An analytically derived inference-time guidance mechanism [12] enforces individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability by injecting constraint-derived gra-dients into each reverse diffusion step. The specific architectural choices, including the selection of a dynamic graph attention encoder over static alternatives, are motivated in Section 2.3 and empirically validated in Section 6. The framework provides three contributions aligned with the identified structural limitations. 

(C1) IR-Robust Generation via Continuous Relaxation. CGD operates in a continuous utility space where individually rational utility vectors always exist, eliminating the hard solver failures typical of discrete allocation spaces. At inference time, an analytically derived guidance gra-dient guarantees a strictly positive utility increment for any IR-violating agent at each reverse diffusion step, provided the guidance scale exceeds a finite threshold. Whether these per-step corrections accumulate to full IR satisfaction depends on corpus distribution and calibrated guid-ance scale; empirical evaluation confirms near-perfect individual rationality across all evaluated corpora under standard calibration. 

(C2) Inference-time welfare recovery without retraining. A welfare guidance term constrained to preserve IR dominance recovers Pareto efficiency at inference time while strictly maintaining individual rationality, without modifying pre-trained model weights. Normative compliance and welfare maximization are thereby decoupled into separate operational phases within a single inference pipeline. 

(C3) Complexity-bounded inference independent of the allocation space. The denoising 2inference cost scales with the model size and number of diffusion steps, independently of the number of possible discrete allocations. Exhaustive solver enumeration time grows exponentially with the number of issues while CGD denoising time remains constant, confirmed empirically across a range of issue counts and corpora. CGD is evaluated on three datasets spanning synthetic and human negotiation domains: a synthetic corpus based on a symmetric Dirichlet distribution [13], the CaSiNo corpus of human campsite negotiation dialogues [4], and the Deal or No Deal corpus of integer-valued negotiation instances [3]. The results demonstrate that CGD achieves near-zero security gaps and satisfies equitability across all corpora, addressing normative criteria that the NBS structurally cannot enforce. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work and formalizes the research gap. Section 3 defines the negotiation model and normative criteria. Section 4 presents the CGD architecture and its theoretical properties. Section 5 describes the datasets, baselines, and evaluation protocols. Section 6 reports the empirical results. Section 7 presents the implications of the study. Section 8 concludes the paper. 

2. Literature Review 

The CGD framework spans four intersecting research streams: computational negotiation and NSSs, dialogue-grounded strategic reasoning, graph neural networks for multi-agent interaction, and diffusion-based generative models for constrained decision-making. 

2.1. Automated Negotiation and Negotiation Support 

Bilateral multi-issue negotiation has been studied as a computational problem for several decades. The field has shifted from handcrafted bidding strategies derived from time-dependent concession rules [1] toward end-to-end learnable policies. Bagga et al. [14] introduce deep learnable strategy templates trained on utility-labeled traces that transfer across preference profiles without manual redesign. Renting et al. [6] propose a graph neural network policy that encodes problem structure as a graph and learns via reinforcement learning, matching canonical baselines without domain-specific feature engineering. Zhang et al. [15] recast negotiation as a market-design problem and show that deep reinforcement learning agents converge to high-welfare, near-symmetric equilibria. These systems demonstrate that learned policies can match or exceed analytical methods in welfare. However, all three optimize individual rewards and cannot guarantee bilateral individual rationality or security compliance. The dominant analytical benchmark for negotiation support remains the NBS [2]. Nakamura [16] provides efficiency-free characterizations showing that individual rationality can replace Pareto optimality in Nash’s theorem. Zeng et al. [17] embed the NBS in a meta-learning framework for fairness-aware optimization, demonstrating that Nash bargaining extends naturally to deep learning pipelines. Neither result addresses the NBS’s structural absence of security proximity or equitability guarantees. Empirical evaluation confirms that satisfying individual rationality does not imply satisfying security proximity (Section 6), motivating security proximity as an independent normative criterion. Wu and Sun [18] propose an agent-based model integrating a fairness function and Q-learning that reduces utility disparity relative to classical strategies. Their scalar fairness term conflates individual rationality with distributional symmetry and provides formal guarantees for neither. CGD addresses this by decomposing normative compliance into three analytically distinct constraints enforced through separate terms in the guidance gradient. 32.2. Dialogue-Grounded Negotiation 

Lewis et al. [3] establish dialogue-grounded negotiation as a distinct task through the Deal or No Deal corpus. Chawla et al. [4] extend this setting with the CaSiNo corpus. In both corpora, negotiation unfolds in natural language, requiring models to infer preferences from conversational context. Large language models currently dominate this task. Kwon et al. [8] propose an LLM-based agent combining linear-programming offer optimization, structured opponent modeling, and Tit-for-Tat reciprocity, achieving competitive individual utility at the cost of a nontrivial walk-away rate. Bianchi et al. [7] show that GPT-4-class models secure mutually beneficial deals but fail under shifts in stakes or tactics. Chawla et al. [19] show that selfish reinforcement learning does not inevitably degrade fairness. Bhattacharya et al. [20] find that current large language models still struggle with commitment and legitimacy in high-stakes settings. A persistent limitation across these systems is that LLM-based agents optimize individual objectives and cannot formally guarantee bilateral constraints such as individual rationality or security. The empir-ical symmetry recovered by Chawla et al. [19] is not formally guaranteed and does not address security proximity. CGD differs from these approaches by enforcing normative constraints via a deterministic, analytically derived guidance gradient rather than through prompt engineering or emergent training behaviour. 

2.3. Graph Neural Networks for Strategic Reasoning 

Negotiation is inherently relational. Agents correspond to nodes, issues correspond to attributes, and the feasibility of an allocation depends on the joint preference graph. Graph neural networks therefore provide a natural inductive bias for encoding negotiation structure. Renting et al. [6] demonstrate that graph representations generalize across preference profiles where flat-vector encoders fail. Fu et al. [21] show that graph-structured state representations in actor-critic models can elicit cooperation and adap-tation simultaneously, while flat-vector baselines collapse to greedy strategies under opponent diversity. The original Graph Attention Network (GAT) [22] uses static attention coefficients computed as a function of each node’s features independently. Brody et al. [23] identify a key limitation of this design: static attention cannot represent the class of attention functions that depend on a joint comparison of both endpoint features. Their Graph Attention Network v2 (GATv2) architecture addresses this by computing attention coefficients from a joint nonlinear function of both source and destination features. In bilateral negotiation, the signal that determines whether a mutually beneficial trade exists is comparative. Agent 1’s value for item j relative to agent 2’s value for item j determines who should receive it. Static attention evaluates each agent’s features in isolation and cannot directly represent this comparative signal. Dynamic attention in GATv2 computes coefficients from the joint features of both agents on each edge, directly encoding the bilateral comparison. This architectural argument motivates the use of GATv2 as the strategic encoder in CGD. Cross-attention between graph and sequence representations provides the fusion mechanism between the strategic and dialogue modalities. Faber and Wattenhofer [24] show that a shared Transformer actor with a graph-based centralized critic captures long-range dependencies in networked multi-agent control, which is architecturally similar to CGD’s fusion of the graph strategic encoder with the dialogue encoder. CGD extends these ideas by conditioning a continuous diffusion denoiser on the fused representation. No prior work combines graph-structured bilateral preference encoding with continuous diffusion generation and inference-time normative guidance for negotiation support. 42.4. Diffusion Models for Decision-Making and Planning 

Denoising diffusion probabilistic models [11] have been extended from image generation to sequential decision-making and planning. Janner et al. [9] introduce Diffuser, the first diffusion-based trajectory planner for offline reinforcement learning, demonstrating that diffusion models can represent multimodal outcome distributions and be steered at inference time through differentiable cost functions. Chi et al. [10] extend this to visuomotor control, showing that diffusion-based action generation outperforms Gaussian and mixture-of-Gaussian policies on manipulation benchmarks. Li [25] proposes planning in a learned latent action space, supporting an equivalence between latent planning and energy-guided sampling that underpins CGD’s continuous utility relaxation. A comprehensive survey by Zhu et al. [26] identifies constrained generation as the central open problem: existing methods can encourage constraint satisfaction through residual loss terms but cannot guarantee it. Classifier-free guidance [12] circumvents retraining costs by steering the denoising process directly at inference time. Zhang et al. [27] recently applied this principle to robot control, demonstrating that guiding pre-trained diffusion policies can enforce novel geometric constraints during deployment. Ajay et al. [28] and Chen et al. [29] extended diffusion planning to hierarchical settings via subgoal conditioning. These frameworks are confined to single-agent environments and lack mechanisms for bilateral constraint enforcement. CGD adapts classifier-free guidance to multi-agent normative settings. Rather than relying on a learned classifier, the guidance gradient in CGD is derived analytically from individual rationality, se-curity, and equitability penalty functions. This analytical derivation yields provably monotone per-step corrections, as established in Section 4.8.1. 

2.5. Fairness, Normative Constraints, and AI 

Bhattacharya et al. [20] show that fairness in large language model bargaining emerges from pre-training rather than from an explicit guarantee. Mouri Zadeh Khaki and Choi [30] show that fairness violations correlate with aggressive reward-maximizing prompting and that third-party norm enforcement partially mitigates them without providing formal guarantees. Wang [31] establishes the existence of Pareto-Nash equilibria in finite multi-objective Markov games, providing theoretical support for treating individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability as simultaneously constrained objectives. Lewis et al. [3] provide clear evidence that reward-maximizing fine-tuning destroys bilateral symmetry in Deal or No Deal. Chawla et al. [19] show that curriculum design can recover near-symmetric outcomes. Zhang et al. [15] show that decentralized agents converge to equitable splits when market mechanisms select for them. Together, these results indicate that normative compliance cannot be reliably achieved through training signal design alone. An architectural mechanism that enforces constraints at inference time, independently of the training objective, is therefore necessary. 

2.6. Research Gap and Positioning of CGD 

Table 1 summarizes the normative coverage of representative recent systems. No prior work simul-taneously guarantees individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability on real-world dialogue corpora. Three specific gaps motivate CGD. First, agent-based systems [3, 6] optimize individual utility and cannot guarantee bilateral individual rationality. Second, LLM-based systems [8, 7] exploit linguistic context but treat normative compliance as a prompt-engineering problem rather than an architectural 5Table 1: Normative coverage of representative negotiation systems. ✓: guaranteed or formally verified. ≈: empirically recovered but not guaranteed. ×: not addressed or violated by design.                                     

> System IR Security Symmetry Pareto
> NBS [2] ≈××✓
> CGO (this work, ablation) ≈×××
> RNN-SL [3] ××≈×
> RNN-RL [3] ××××
> Selfish-RL [19] ××≈×
> GNN-RL [6] ××××
> ASTRA [8] ≈×××
> CGD (this work) ✓✓✓≈

guarantee. Third, diffusion planners for decision-making [9, 10] operate in single-agent environments with no mechanism for bilateral constraint enforcement. The contribution of CGD lies in a specific architectural composition designed to close all three gaps simultaneously. Specifically, a graph attention encoder captures the bilateral relational structure of prefer-ences, and a dialogue encoder provides complementary preference signals from the conversational context. Once cross-attention fuses these modalities, a continuous diffusion denoiser generates recommendations in utility space. Finally, an analytically derived guidance gradient enforces individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability at inference time without retraining. While each component can be found in prior work in other domains, the overarching contribution is their composition for the bilateral normative negotiation support problem, together with the analytical guidance gradient derived from cooperative bargaining criteria. The formal problem statement follows in Section 3. 

3. Problem Statement 

Bilateral negotiations require two self-interested parties to jointly allocate a set of resources under incomplete information. A NSS acts as a third-party recommender that proposes outcomes satisfying individual rationality, procedural security, equity, and Pareto efficiency. No single allocation simultane-ously optimizes all four criteria, and any method that searches over discrete allocations or conditions only on declared utilities inherits at least one structural limitation. This section formalizes the environment, defines each normative criterion, identifies the tensions among them, and specifies the three structural limitations that motivate CGD. 

3.1. Negotiation Environment 

Let N = {1, 2} be the set of agents and J = {1, . . . , J } the set of indivisible issues, each assigned to exactly one agent. Agent i ∈ N holds a private value vector vi ∈ RJ 

> ≥0

normalized so that P 

> j

vij = 1 .The joint preference structure forms the value matrix V ∈ R|N |×|J | with rows vi, which is never observed directly and must be inferred from self-reports and dialogue. The information asymmetry is observational rather than distributional: the framework learns to extract preference signals from observable behaviour rather than modelling uncertainty over agent type distributions. 

Definition 3.1 (Allocation) . An allocation is a binary matrix X ∈ { 0, 1}|N |×|J | satisfying 

X

> i∈N

Xij = 1 ∀ j ∈ J . (1) The set of all feasible allocations is denoted X .6Definition 3.2 (Agent utility) . The utility of agent i under allocation X is 

ui(X) = X

> j∈J

Xij vij ∈ [0 , 1] . (2) The agents communicate through a negotiation dialogue D comprising natural language utterances exchanged prior to agreement. These utterances carry implicit signals about priorities, concession will-ingness, and reservation utilities that supplement the declared value matrix V .

3.2. Normative Criteria 

Four normative criteria are defined below. Individual rationality and Pareto efficiency are standard in cooperative bargaining theory. Security proximity and equitability are operational additions specific to the discrete multi-issue setting. 

Definition 3.3 (Individual Rationality) . An allocation X is individually rational if 

ui(X) > b i ∀ i ∈ N , (3) where bi ∈ [0 , 1] is agent i’s reservation utility, the payoff from its best outside option. The IR rate of a recommendation policy is IR = EX [Q 

> i

1[ui(X) > b i]] .

Remark 3.4 (Continuous versus discrete IR) . CGD generates recommendations in the continuous utility space R|N | , where IR-satisfying vectors always exist. The scalar utility ˆui of the continuous recommenda-tion substitutes for ui(X) during guidance and evaluation. The projection step mapping the continuous recommendation to the nearest feasible discrete allocation may reduce utility and produce a discrete allocation that violates IR even when the continuous recommendation does not. Under consistent zero Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement (BATNA) evaluation conditions this projection gap is empir-ically negligible (Section 6). The operational advantage of the continuous relaxation is that CGD always produces a recommendation, whereas a discrete solver that finds X IR = ∅ produces no output. 

Definition 3.5 (Security Level and Proximity) . Agent i’s security level is the utility obtained by retaining the ⌈J/ 2⌉ most-valued issues: 

σi = X

> j∈Ti

vij , Ti = top ⌈J/ 2⌉(vi). (4) An allocation is security-proximate if 

∆σ (X) = X

> i∈N

max( σi − ui(X), 0) ≤ ε (5) for tolerance ε ≥ 0.

Remark 3.6 (Relation to the Nash Bargaining Solution) . The classical NBS [2] maximizes the Nash product Q

> i

(ui − di) over a convex feasible set given an exogenous disagreement point d. Definition 3.5 departs from this paradigm in two respects. First, the security level σi is endogenous: rather than an exogenous payoff or a minimax value of the discrete game, it is a proportional-share reference derived directly from the value matrix V . The ⌈J/ 2⌉ norm establishes a procedural fairness standard rather than a strict strategic guarantee. Second, because σi is computable entirely from self-reported values, it imposes no additional elicitation burden. In settings where the true disagreement point di is known, it naturally supersedes both bi in Definition 3.3 and σi in Definition 3.5. Crucially, because the NBS optimizes subject only to individual rationality, it provides no structural mechanism to enforce security 7proximity. Empirical evaluations (Section 6) confirm this limitation, justifying security proximity as an analytically distinct normative requirement. 

Definition 3.7 (Equitability) . An allocation X is equitable if 

∆eq (X) = u1(X) − u2(X) ≤ δ (6) for tolerance δ ≥ 0.

Remark 3.8 (Relation to Nash’s symmetry axiom) . Nash’s symmetry axiom [2] states that if the feasible utility set is symmetric about the diagonal and disagreement payoffs are equal, then the Nash solution assigns equal utilities. This is a conditional property of the solution concept, not a constraint on indi-vidual allocations. Definition 3.7 is stronger: it requires bounded inequality for any allocation regardless of whether the feasible set is symmetric. The NSS has a duty to both parties and cannot condition equitability on structural properties that may not hold in practice. 

Remark 3.9 (Normalized equitability metric and threshold) . Definition 3.7 bounds the raw difference |u1 −

u2|, which is not commensurable across negotiations with different joint welfare levels. The normalized form |u1 −u2| / (u1 +u2 +ε) is scale-invariant and aligns with the Nash axiom of invariance to positive affine utility transformations [2]. It is applied uniformly to all methods throughout this paper. A threshold of 

∆eq ≤ 0.15 is used operationally. This value is not derived from a game-theoretic axiom. It represents a practitioner tolerance requiring that no agent receives less than approximately 43% of joint welfare, and is substantially stricter than the random allocation baseline ( ∆eq ≈ 0.55 ) and the greedy efficient allocation (∆eq ≈ 0.43 ). The threshold is the tightest round value under which CGD satisfies equitability across all evaluated corpora while NBS violates it on two of three, making it the smallest value that meaningfully discriminates between the two systems; sensitivity to this choice is verifiable from the symmetry gap columns of Table 10. 1 The threshold is adjustable at inference time through weq without retraining. 

Definition 3.10 (Pareto Efficiency) . An allocation X is Pareto-efficient if no alternative X′ ∈ X improves one agent’s utility without reducing the other’s. The Pareto gap is 

∆P(X) = W ∗ − (u1(X) + u2(X)) 

W ∗ ∈ [0 , 1] , (7) where W ∗ = max X′∈X {u1(X′) + u2(X′)}.

3.3. Criterion Tensions and the Support Problem 

The four criteria are mutually inconsistent in general. Three tensions arise routinely in the multi-issue setting. 

Tension 1: IR versus security-proximity. When both agents hold high reservation utilities bi

and high security levels σi, the IR-feasible set X IR = {X ∈ X : ui(X) > b i ∀ i} may be empty: 

max  

> X∈X

min 

> i∈N

 ui(X) − bi

 ≤ 0. (8) The NBS is undefined in this case. The practitioner faces a negotiation in which no allocation is acceptable to both parties, precisely when support is most needed.                        

> 1Reading Table 10 at three thresholds: at δ= 0 .10 ,CGD passes on all three corpora (symmetry gaps 0.099 ,0.021 ,
> 0.006 ) while NBS fails on all three ( 0.182 ,0.283 ,0.136 ); at δ= 0 .15 ,CGD continues to pass on all three while NBS
> passes only on DND (0.136 ); at δ= 0 .20 the discrimination pattern is unchanged. CGD compliance holds across all three thresholds, confirming the result is not an artefact of the chosen value.

8Tension 2: Pareto efficiency versus equitability. The allocation maximizing joint surplus assigns each issue to the agent that values it most. When one agent’s values dominate across all issues, this allocation gives the dominant agent near-total utility and the other near-zero utility. Equitability therefore conflicts with Pareto efficiency whenever agents have heterogeneous value profiles, which is the generic case. 

Tension 3: Security-proximity versus equitability. When the top-⌈J/ 2⌉ item sets T1 and 

T2 overlap substantially, assigning contested items to one agent necessarily reduces the other below its security level. Even when a jointly security-proximate allocation exists, it may be asymmetric when 

σ1̸ = σ2.Relaxing any one criterion has consequences for the parties involved. This motivates a formulation that imposes all four constraints simultaneously with practitioner-adjustable tolerances. 

Definition 3.11 (Negotiation Decision Support Problem) . Given V , b = ( b1, b 2), σ = ( σ1, σ 2), tolerances 

(ε, δ, η ) ≥ 0, and dialogue D, the NDSP is to find X∗ satisfying: (IR) ui(X∗) > b i ∀ i, (9) (Sec) ∆σ (X∗) ≤ ε, (10) (Eq) ∆eq (X∗) ≤ δ, (11) (Par) ∆P(X∗) ≤ η. (12) 

3.4. Structural Limitations 

Three structural limitations prevent the NDSP from being solved by existing approaches in general cases. 

L1: Discrete infeasibility. Any framework searching over X fails to produce a recommendation when X IR = ∅ under condition (8). A framework operating in the continuous utility space R|N | is not subject to this constraint, as IR-satisfying vectors always exist in the continuous relaxation. The nearest feasible discrete allocation is recovered in post-processing. The operational advantage is that CGD always produces a recommendation, whereas a discrete solver fails entirely when X IR = ∅. If the discrete allocation space genuinely contains no IR-feasible allocation, the projection step cannot recover one. The continuous guidance minimizes the residual IR violation before projection. The magnitude of this residual gap is quantified empirically in Section 6. 

L2: Preference elicitation gap. Optimization-based NSSs condition on the declared value matrix 

V , which is an imperfect proxy for true preferences. The negotiation dialogue D contains complementary signals about issue salience and concession limits absent from V . Realising this capacity requires two separable conditions to hold: the corpus must carry recoverable preference signals beyond V , and the encoder must have sufficient semantic competence to extract them. Both conditions are tested empirically in Section 6 through a three-way architectural ablation and a controlled misrepresentation experiment. 

L3: Exponential search complexity. Exhaustive evaluation of all |X | = |N | |J | allocations grows exponentially in |J | . Two computational steps must be distinguished. The denoising inference step operates in R|N | and can be made independent of |X | , scaling only with the model size and number of diffusion steps. The post-processing step, which maps the continuous recommendation to the nearest feasible discrete allocation, requires a search over X and retains the exponential dependence on |J | .The continuous relaxation therefore shifts the exponential bottleneck from the optimization phase to the post-processing phase rather than eliminating it. Empirical timing results in Section 6 quantify both components across |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 }, confirming constant denoising time and exponentially growing NBS 9enumeration time across all evaluated corpora. The crossover point at which NBS enumeration time exceeds CGD denoising time is estimated at approximately |J | ≈ 17 .

3.5. Research Objective 

Limitations L1 through L3 are structural properties of the discrete allocation formulation rather than deficiencies of particular algorithms. Addressing all three simultaneously requires generating recommen-dations in continuous utility space, conditioning jointly on structured preference data and dialogue, and producing recommendations at inference cost independent of |X | .The CGD framework is designed to satisfy these requirements through four operational objectives. 

(O1) IR-completeness. Recommendations satisfy individual rationality by operating in the continu-ous utility relaxation and applying iterative normative corrections during generation, circumvent-ing the discrete infeasibility condition (Equation (8)). Discrete IR compliance under consistent evaluation conditions is empirically confirmed across all corpora. 

(O2) Contextual grounding. Recommendations are conditioned on graph-structured strategic con-text and negotiation dialogue, incorporating both declared and dialogue-revealed preference sig-nals where recoverable. The conditions under which dialogue signals are recoverable are identified empirically in Section 6. 

(O3) Welfare recoverability. The inference pipeline supports optional welfare guidance that recov-ers Pareto-efficient discrete allocations without model retraining, while preserving all normative constraints enforced by the primary guidance gradient. 

(O4) Complexity-bounded inference. The denoising inference cost is O(T · | θ|), independent of 

|X | = |N | |J | . This architectural decoupling is empirically confirmed across multiple issue counts and all evaluated corpora. Whether and to what degree these properties are achieved is established empirically in Section 6. 

4. Methodology 

The three limitations identified in Section 3 stem from two structural constraints: negotiation out-comes are represented as discrete allocations X ∈ X , and recommendations are conditioned solely on the declared value matrix V . Limitation L1 emerges because the finite set X may contain no IR-feasible allo-cation. Limitation L2 arises because V is an incomplete proxy for true preferences when the dialogue D

carries implicit preference signals. Limitation L3 restricts scalability because any algorithm enumerating 

X incurs costs that grow exponentially in the number of issues. Addressing all three requires generating recommendations in the continuous utility space R|N | , con-ditioning them jointly on V and D, and ensuring that the denoising inference cost is independent of |X | .The CGD framework is designed to satisfy these requirements. Each architectural component is detailed below, and Section 4.8 establishes the corresponding theoretical properties. The operational scope of each theoretical result and its relationship to the empirical findings are discussed in Section 7. 

4.1. Architectural Overview 

CGD processes two inputs to produce a single output. The first is the strategic context G =(V , b, σ, r), comprising the value matrix, reservation utilities, security levels, and role indicators. The sec-10 ond is the dialogue context D, comprising the natural language utterances exchanged by the negotiating parties. These inputs are mapped to a joint utility tensor ˆu ∈ R|N |× du . The denoiser operates in a du-dimensional latent space per agent. The final scalar utility recommendation for agent i is extracted from the first component, ˆui ≡ ˆui, 1. The remaining du − 1 dimensions serve as auxiliary latent capacity during generation and are discarded prior to evaluation. All normative criteria and metrics are evaluated on the clamped value ˆui ∈ [0 , 1] .The transformation proceeds through four stages, illustrated in Figure 1. A graph attention encoder maps G into a graph-structured embedding Hstrat capturing relational dependencies between agents. In parallel, a dialogue encoder processes D into token-level representations Htxt . A cross-attention layer fuses these embeddings into a unified conditioning context hctx , which is injected into every layer of the denoiser via feature-wise modulation. A U-Net denoiser then iteratively transforms Gaussian noise uT

into the recommendation ˆu0 via DDPM reverse diffusion. During this reverse process, normative guidance corrections align the generated output with individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability.                 

> Strategic & Dialogue Encoding
> Conditional Graph Diffusion
> Agent State
> V,b,σ,r
> GATv2 Encoder Hstrat
> Dialogue Context D
> Dialogue Encoder Htxt
> Cross-Attention
> hctx
> U-Net Denoiser
> ϵθ(ut, t, hctx )
> Lext norm : IR +Security
> +Equitability +Welfare
> ˆu0Noise uT
> condition
> −γ∇utLext norm
> sample

Figure 1: The CGD pipeline. Left : The strategic context (V , b, σ, r) and dialogue context D are processed by a GATv2 encoder and a dialogue encoder, respectively. Cross-attention fuses these representations into a unified conditioning context 

hctx . Right : The U-Net denoiser ϵθ executes the DDPM reverse process conditioned on hctx . An extended normative guidance objective Lext norm iteratively corrects the noisy sample at each step (dashed arrow) without altering the denoiser weights θ.

4.2. Strategic Graph Construction via GATv2 

The strategic encoder must represent not only each agent’s individual attributes but also the compar-ative relationship between them. In bilateral negotiation, the signal that determines whether a mutually beneficial trade exists is relational: agent i’s value for item j relative to agent k’s value for the same item determines efficient assignment. This relational structure motivates a graph representation. The strategic context G is modeled as a directed graph G = ( V, E) over agent nodes V = N connected by bidirectional edges. Each node i is assigned the feature vector 

si =  bi, σ i, v⊤ 

> i

, r⊤ 

> i

, o⊤ 

> i

, 0pad 

 ∈ RF , (13) where oi is an optional social-value-orientation encoding (zero-padded when unavailable) and 0pad ensures fixed dimensionality F .As established in Section 2.3, GATv2 is employed for the strategic graph encoding. For a directed edge (k → i) at attention head h, the unnormalized attention coefficient is computed as: 

e(h) 

> ki

= a(h)⊤ LeakyReLU  W (h)src sk + W (h)dst si

. (14) The attention weight that agent i assigns to agent k therefore reflects the relative comparison of their parameters rather than evaluating either agent’s features in isolation. The final embedding is obtained 11 by softmax normalization and multi-head aggregation: 

hi = ELU 



Wout 

> Hh=1

X 

> k∈N (i)

α(h) 

> ki

W (h)dst sk



, (15) yielding the strategic embedding matrix Hstrat ∈ R|N |× dstrat . The choice of GATv2 over static alterna-tives is validated empirically in Section 6 through an ablation comparing flat MLP, graph convolutional network, original GAT, and GATv2 encoders on normative compliance metrics. 

4.3. Dialogue Encoding 

Limitation L2 arises because V is an incomplete proxy for true preferences. The dialogue D contains complementary signals about concession intent, issue salience, and context-dependent shifts in valuation. Whether these signals are extractable in practice depends on two separable conditions: the dialogue must carry preference information beyond V , and the encoder must have sufficient semantic capacity to extract it. Observation 4.3 in Section 4.8.2 establishes the first condition as a standard consequence of conditioning on informative variables. The second is an empirical question; the ablation in Section 6.4 tests both conditions, and the implications of the results are discussed in Section 7. A transformer-based dialogue encoder processes the sequence D = ( w1, . . . , w L) to produce token-level representations and a pooled summary: 

Htxt , htxt = DialogueEnc( D), Htxt ∈ RL×dtxt , htxt ∈ Rdtxt . (16) The token-level representations Htxt preserve fine-grained contextual dependencies for downstream cross-attention fusion. The pooled summary htxt provides an auxiliary conditioning signal. 

4.4. Cross-Attention Fusion 

The strategic embedding hstrat and the dialogue token sequence Htxt operate at different granularities and must be aligned before conditioning the denoiser. Cross-attention allows the strategic summary to selectively attend to the most relevant dialogue segments: 

hctx = softmax 

 (WQhstrat )( WK Htxt )⊤

√dc



(WV Htxt ), (17) where WQ, WK , WV project inputs into a shared latent space of dimension dc. A residual connection to hstrat is applied after the attention mechanism. The fused context hctx ∈ Rdc is computed once and broadcast to every denoiser layer via feature-wise modulation. This ensures that conditioning cost remains constant across all T reverse-diffusion steps. 

4.5. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) 

With hctx encoding the negotiation context, the objective is to generate a utility vector satisfying the NDSP criteria. A diffusion model is suited to this task because it parameterizes a flexible distribution over utility vectors, supports arbitrary conditioning, and admits gradient-based corrections at inference time without modifying the underlying model weights. 12 4.5.1. Forward Process 

Let u0 ∈ R|N |× du be the target utility vector drawn from the training distribution. The forward process corrupts u0 over T steps via a Gaussian Markov chain with closed-form marginal: 

q(ut | u0) = N ut; √¯αt u0, (1 − ¯αt)I, (18) where αt = 1 − βt, ¯αt = Qts=1 αs, and {βt}Tt=1 is a monotonically increasing noise schedule detailed in Section 5.2. 

4.5.2. Denoiser: U-Net with FiLM Conditioning 

The denoiser ϵθ (ut, t, hctx ) is implemented as a U-Net that estimates the noise added at step t,conditioned on hctx and the current time step t. The encoder-decoder structure uses feedforward layers with skip connections. A self-attention layer at the bottleneck across the agent dimension allows each agent’s representation to attend to the other, capturing bilateral interactions. Skip connections preserve per-agent feature asymmetry, accommodating the equity tensions identified in Section 3. The conditioning signal is injected into every layer via Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) [32]. Let C(ℓ) = [ hctx , et] denote the concatenation of the fused context and a sinusoidal time-step embedding 

et. A small MLP predicts affine parameters applied as: 

ez(ℓ) 

> i

= γ(ℓ) ⊙ LayerNorm( z(ℓ) 

> i

) + β(ℓ), (19) where (γ(ℓ), β(ℓ)) is the MLP output. Because hctx remains constant across all T reverse steps, the FiLM parameters vary only with t, and inference cost scales strictly as O(T · | θ|).

4.5.3. Training Objective 

The model minimizes a composite loss combining DDPM reconstruction error with a normative penalty: 

L(θ) = Et, u0,ϵ

 ϵ − ϵθ (ut, t, hctx ) 2| {z }

> Ldiff

+λ Eu0

Lnorm (u0), (20) where λ > 0 regulates the normative penalty Lnorm (Section 4.6). This penalty regularizes the denoiser during training, encouraging alignment with IR, security, and equitability constraints prior to inference-time guidance. 

4.6. Normative Guidance 

A trained diffusion model approximates the utility distribution of the training corpus. Because real-world negotiation data often include outcomes that violate IR, fall below security thresholds, or ex-hibit significant utility asymmetry, normative guidance addresses these discrepancies at inference time. Constraint-derived gradients are injected into each reverse step, steering the generation process without altering the pre-trained model weights. 13 4.6.1. Normative Loss 

The normative loss formulates the three primary NDSP constraints as a weighted sum of convex penalty terms: 

Lnorm ( ˆ u) = X

> i∈N

max( bi − ˆui, 1, 0) 

| {z }

> LIR

+ X

> i∈N

max( σi − ˆui, 1, 0) 

| {z }

> Lsec

+ weq ˆu1,1 − ˆu2,1

| {z }

> Leq

, (21) where weq ≥ 0 controls the equitability penalty strength. The three terms enforce Individual Rationality (Definition 3.3), Security-Proximity (Definition 3.5), and Equitability (Definition 3.7) respectively. Pareto efficiency is not explicitly penalized; it is pursued indirectly as the diffusion model learns the distribution of successful negotiated outcomes. All three terms are convex, non-negative, and subgradient-computable, and Lnorm = 0 is achieved if and only if both agents’ utilities meet their respective thresholds and are perfectly equal. 

4.6.2. Guided Reverse Process 

During inference, the standard DDPM update at each reverse step t is augmented by a gradient correction derived from an extended normative loss Lext norm :

ut−1 ← 1

√αt



ut − 1 − αt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ (ut, t, hctx )

| {z }

> uraw
> t−1

−γ ∇ut Lext norm (ut), (22) where γ ≥ 0 is the guidance scale. This correction shifts the sample trajectory while leaving model weights unchanged. The gradient is computed by detaching ut from the computational graph and calling backward on Lext norm explicitly, ensuring that the gradient step is not suppressed by the surrounding inference context. The extended loss Lext norm augments Equation (21) with a welfare guidance term weighted by wwelfare ≥

0. Its subgradient with respect to agent i’s scalar utility is: 

∂Lext norm 

∂ ˆui, 1

= −1[ˆ ui, 1 < b i] − 1[ˆ ui, 1 < σ i] + weq sign(ˆ ui, 1 − ˆuj, 1) − wwelfare 

 1 − ˆui, 1

+, (23) where j̸ = i and (1 − ˆui, 1)+ is agent i’s remaining utility headroom. The welfare term pushes each agent’s utility upward proportionally to available headroom, preserving natural asymmetries between agents at different utility levels. This separation of normative and welfare objectives within the same inference pipeline constitutes the operational basis of Contribution C2: normative constraints are enforced unconditionally by the primary gradient, and welfare is then maximized subject to those constraints by the welfare term. To guarantee that the IR correction remains dominant whenever an IR violation occurs, the combined weights must satisfy: 

weq + wwelfare < 1. (24) When ˆui, 1 < b i, both hinge indicators contribute −1 while the equitability and welfare terms contribute at most +weq and +wwelfare respectively, yielding ∂Lext norm /∂ ˆui, 1 ≤ − 1 + weq + wwelfare , which is strictly negative if and only if Equation (24) holds. This condition bounds the valid hyperparameter space for 

wwelfare given any chosen weq . The theoretical consequence is established in Section 4.8.1. 14 4.6.3. BATNA Estimation Strategies 

The parameters bi and σi in Equation (23) are derived from V at inference time. Three strategies for estimating the reservation utility bi are evaluated: 

• Zero (bi = 0 ): Any positive utility satisfies IR, providing a conservative lower bound. 

• Floor (bi ∝ max j vij ): BATNA proportional to the agent’s highest-valued issue. 

• Dataset (bi = ˆF −1 

> i

(0 .1) ): The 10th percentile of agent i’s realized utilities in the training corpus, requiring access to historical outcome data. Security levels σi are computed deterministically as the sum of agent i’s top-⌈J/ 2⌉ item values and require no estimation. 

4.7. Post-Processing: Recovery of Feasible Allocations 

The NDSP formally requires a discrete allocation X∗ ∈ X . CGD generates recommendations in 

R|N | and recovers the final allocation by mapping the continuous recommendation to the closest discrete allocation in utility space: 

X∗ = arg min 

> X∈X

u(X) − ˆu0

> 2

, (25) where ˆu0 = (ˆ u1, ˆu2) is the clamped continuous recommendation and u(X) is the utility vector realized by allocation X. The search over X is exhaustive. Its cost grows exponentially in |J | and is the computational bottleneck at large item counts. Empirical timing results in Section 6 confirm that post-processing time grows exponentially across |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 } while denoising time remains constant. A generalized weighted objective arg min X∈X α∥u(X) − ˆu0∥2 − (1 − α)( u1(X) + u2(X)) for α ∈ [0 , 1] 

interpolates between strict nearest-allocation search ( α = 1 ) and greedy maximum-welfare search ( α = 0 ). Empirical evaluation in Section 6.7 confirms that α∗ = 1 .0 universally across all corpora. Two welfare metrics are distinguished throughout. The continuous welfare Wcont = E[ˆ u1+ˆ u2] measures recommendation quality prior to post-processing. The discrete welfare Wdisc = E[u1(X∗) + u2(X∗)] 

measures actual utility after allocation recovery. Because all baseline methods operate exclusively in X ,comparative evaluations use Wdisc throughout. 

4.8. Theoretical Analysis 

The three structural limitations are addressed through different analytical mechanisms. Limitation L3 is circumvented by the architectural design. Limitation L1 is mitigated through a bounded guidance scale. Limitation L2 is addressed by expanding representational capacity. Each is formalized below. 

4.8.1. L1: Discrete Infeasibility 

Definition 4.1 (Per-step denoising magnitude) . The per-step denoising contribution to agent i’s scalar utility at reverse step t is: 

δ(i) 

> t

= 1 − αt

pαt(1 − ¯αt) ϵ(i) 

> θ

(ut, t, hctx ), (26) where ϵ(i) 

> θ

is the i-th agent’s noise component. Let ∆(i) = sup t, ut,hctx |δ(i) 

> t

|.

Theorem 4.2 (Monotone per-step IR correction under guidance) . Suppose weq + wwelfare < 1. If γ ≥

γ∗ := ∆ (i)/(1 − weq − wwelfare ) for all i ∈ N , then at every reverse step t where ˆu(t) 

> i, 1

< b i:

ˆu(t−1)  

> i, 1

> ˆu(t−1) , raw  

> i, 1

. (27) 15 Proof. When ˆu(t) 

> i, 1

< b i, both hinge indicators in Equation (23) contribute −1. The equitability term contributes at most +weq and the welfare term at most +wwelfare . Therefore: 

∂Lext norm 

∂ ˆui, 1

≤ − 1 + weq + wwelfare < 0, (28) where strict negativity follows from Equation (24). Applying the guidance correction: 

ˆu(t−1)  

> i, 1

= ˆ u(t−1) ,raw  

> i, 1

− γ ∂Lext norm 

∂ ˆui, 1

≥ ˆu(t−1) ,raw  

> i, 1

+ γ(1 − weq − wwelfare ). (29) Because γ(1 − weq − wwelfare ) > 0, the result follows. The threshold γ∗ = ∆ (i)/(1 − weq − wwelfare ) is finite for any weights satisfying Equation (24), since 

ϵθ is continuous on a compact domain, and the denominator is strictly positive. 

4.8.2. L2: Preference Elicitation Gap Observation 4.3 (Necessity of dialogue conditioning) . This observation restates a standard consequence of conditioning on informative variables [13]. Let FG denote models conditioned solely on G and FD

denote models additionally conditioned on D. If E[u∗ 

> i

| G , D ] varies with D for fixed G, then for any 

f ∈ F G :

ED

∥f (G) − u∗(D)∥2 > min  

> f∗∈F D

ED

∥f ∗(G, D ) − u∗(D)∥2. (30) The proof is a standard bias-variance decomposition: ED [∥f (G) − u∗(D)∥2] = ∥f (G) − μD ∥2 + Var D (u∗),where μD = ED [u∗ | G ]. Because D is informative, Var D (u∗) > 0, and the optimal f ∗(G, D ) = E[u∗ |G, D ] ∈ F D achieves strictly lower residual error. Observation 4.3 establishes the formal motivation for including dialogue conditioning. Whether the representational capacity of the cross-attention formulation (Equation (17)) is realised in practice depends on encoder quality and corpus volume. 

4.8.3. L3: Exponential Search Complexity 

Proposition 4.4 (Inference complexity) . The denoising inference cost of CGD is O(T · | θ|), independent of |X | = |N | |J | .Proof. This follows by inspection of Algorithm 1. Cross-attention fusion (Line 3) is computed once at cost O(|N | · L · dc), constant in |J | . Each of the T reverse diffusion steps (Lines 5–8) requires one forward pass through ϵθ at cost O(|θ|), one FiLM modulation at cost O(|N | · du), and one subgradient evaluation at cost O(|N | ). None of these operations contains |J | or |X | , so total denoising cost is O(T · | θ|).The post-processing step (Equation (25)) requires an exhaustive search over X and retains exponential dependence on |J | . The continuous relaxation therefore shifts the exponential bottleneck from the optimization phase to the post-processing phase. 

4.9. Inference Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 integrates the components of Sections 4.2–4.7 into a unified end-to-end procedure. Lines 1–3 process the two input modalities. The strategic context G is encoded by GATv2 (Line 1) and the dialogue D by the dialogue encoder (Line 2). Cross-attention fuses these into hctx (Line 3), computed 16 once and fixed across all T denoising steps. Line 4 initializes the reverse diffusion from uT ∼ N (0, I).Lines 5–8 execute the reverse loop: at each step t, Line 6 computes the standard DDPM update and Line 7 applies the normative guidance correction. Theorem 4.2 guarantees that this correction strictly increases the utility of any IR-violating agent at each step t where γ ≥ γ∗. Line 9 clamps the final output to [0 , 1] . Line 10 recovers the discrete allocation via exhaustive nearest-allocation search. Total computational cost is O(T · | θ|) for the denoising phase, plus O(|X | ) for post-processing. 

Algorithm 1 CGD Inference: Normative Guided Reverse Diffusion 

Require: Strategic context G, dialogue D, guidance scale γ, steps T , weights weq , w welfare ≥ 0 satisfying 

weq + wwelfare < 1

Ensure: Recommended utility ˆu0, discrete allocation X∗ 

> 1:

Hstrat , hstrat ← GATv2( G) ▷ Section 4.2  

> 2:

Htxt ← DialogueEnc( D) ▷ Section 4.3  

> 3:

hctx ← CrossAttn( hstrat , Htxt ) ▷ Eq. 17; computed once  

> 4:

uT ∼ N (0, I) ▷ initialize from prior  

> 5:

for t = T, T −1, . . . , 1 do  

> 6:

uraw  

> t−1

← 1

√αt



ut − 1 − αt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ (ut, t, hctx )



▷ DDPM update, Eq. 22  

> 7:

ut−1 ← uraw  

> t−1

− γ ∇ut Lext norm (ut) ▷ per-step correction, Thm. 4.2  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

ˆu0 ← clamp( u0, 0, 1) ▷ enforce utility range  

> 10:

X∗ ← arg min X∈X ∥u(X) − ˆu0∥2 ▷ post-processing, Eq. 25  

> 11:

return ˆu0, X ∗

5. Experimental Setup 

5.1. Corpora 

CGD is evaluated across three negotiation corpora comprising synthetic and human-generated dia-logues. Each instance in the primary evaluation involves two agents negotiating over three indivisible issues, yielding a discrete allocation space of |X | = 8 . A separate scalability analysis in Section 6.5 extends the synthetic corpus to larger issue sets |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 }, confirming constant denoising time across the resulting allocation spaces |X | ∈ { 8, 32 , 128 , 1024 }.The Synthetic corpus is generated using a bilateral negotiation simulator designed to ensure balance across agent roles. The first agent’s value vector is drawn from a symmetric Dirichlet distribution, 

v0 ∼ Dir( 1J ). The second agent’s values are a uniformly random permutation of the first, preserving identical marginal distributions while introducing structural asymmetry within each instance. Reservation utilities are set to a shared fraction f ∼ Uniform(0 .1, 0.3) of each agent’s highest-valued item. A random role swap is applied with probability 0.5 to balance the training distribution. Across 300 training and 60 validation instances, the generator achieves an expected utility difference |E[u1] − E[u2]| < 0.001 and win rate P (agent 1 wins ) ≈ 0.5.The CaSiNo corpus [4] comprises 1,030 crowdsourced campsite negotiation dialogues in which partic-ipants allocate food, water, and firewood according to private priority orderings. After applying a data quality filter, 1,000 instances are retained and partitioned into 800 training and 200 validation samples. Item values are derived from three priority levels mapped to integer scores and normalized to the unit interval. Social-value-orientation (SVO) annotations are used as agent node features. The DND corpus [3] contains human dialogues negotiating discrete pools of books, hats, and balls. A unified parser standardizes the diverse distribution formats and excludes malformed instances, resulting 17 in 600 training and 120 validation samples. SVO annotations are unavailable for DND; the corresponding node features are zero-padded to maintain architectural consistency. Table 2 summarizes the datasets.              

> Table 2: Corpus summary. |X | denotes the number of possible discrete allocations. SVO indicates availability of social value orientation annotations. The Default BATNA strategy is used in the primary evaluation; the ablation study (Table 6) confirms that normative compliance is insensitive to BATNA strategy at the optimal guidance scale. †The Floor strategy applies f= 0 .3, the upper bound of the synthetic generator’s range f∼Uniform(0 .1,0.3) , and therefore overestimates the true reservation utility for instances where f < 0.3.

Corpus Train Val |X | SVO Human Default BATNA Synthetic 300 60 8 No No Zero CaSiNo 800 200 8 Yes Yes Zero Deal or No Deal 600 120 8 No Yes Zero 

5.2. Implementation Details 

Architectural dimensions and training protocols are unified across all experiments to ensure that observed performance differences reflect corpus characteristics rather than dataset-specific tuning. Table 3 summarizes the model architecture. The GATv2 encoder uses H = 4 attention heads to process agent-level strategic features. The dialogue encoder is a three-layer transformer trained from random initialization jointly with the diffusion model, encouraging an inductive bias toward corpus-specific lexical patterns. It operates on a vocabulary of 8,192 tokens generated using a word frequency tokenizer. The U-Net denoiser employs an encoder-decoder structure with layer widths of 128, 256, and 256, incorporating a multi-head self-attention bottleneck across the agent dimension. The total model has 3,350,304 trainable parameters. The forward diffusion process follows a standard linear noise schedule: βt = β1+( t−1)( βT −β1)/(T −1) ,bounded by β1 = 1 × 10 −4 and βT = 2 × 10 −2, consistent with [11]. Reservation utilities bi are calibrated at inference time using one of three strategies. The Zero strategy (bi = 0 ) asserts that any positive utility satisfies IR and provides a conservative lower bound. The Floor strategy ( bi = f · max j vij with f = 0 .3) sets the BATNA proportional to the agent’s most-valued item; for the Synthetic corpus this overestimates the true reservation utility since 0.3 is the upper bound of the generating distribution. The Dataset strategy ( bi = ˆF −1 

> i

(0 .1) ) derives the BATNA from the 10th percentile of realized utilities in the training corpus. The ablation study confirms that normative compliance at the optimal guidance scale is insensitive to BATNA strategy across all corpora. Zero BATNA is used as the default throughout the primary evaluation for consistency and reproducibility. BATNA values are pre-computed at corpus construction time; the ablation therefore measures sensitivity of inference-time normative guidance to BATNA calibration independently of the model’s training phase. The equitability weight weq = 0 .5 serves three functions. During training, it scales the equitability penalty in Lnorm (Equation (21)), regularizing the denoiser toward symmetric utility distributions. At inference time, it limits the extent to which equitability corrections can oppose IR and security corrections in the guidance gradient (Equation (22)). It also establishes the permissible range for the welfare guidance weight: the joint constraint weq + wwelfare < 1 (Equation (24)) bounds wwelfare < 0.5, ensuring IR corrections remain dominant when welfare guidance is active. The normative guidance gradient is computed by detaching ut from the computational graph and calling backward on Lext norm explicitly. This ensures that the guidance gradient step is not suppressed by the surrounding inference context, which is necessary for the per-step correction of Theorem 4.2 to take effect in practice. 18 Models are trained for 20 epochs using the AdamW optimizer [33] with initial learning rate η =3 × 10 −4, weight decay λwd = 10 −2, and cosine annealing to η/ 20 . Gradient norms are clipped at 1.0 and batch size is 16 throughout. All results are reported as mean ± standard deviation over three fixed random seeds (42, 123, 456). Figure 2 reports training and validation diffusion MSE across all 20 epochs at the best-performing configuration per corpus. In all three cases, validation MSE remains at or below training MSE throughout training and converges smoothly to stable values without divergence. Best-val checkpoints occur at epoch 20 on CaSiNo and DND, with training and validation losses within measurement noise on Synthetic. This pattern is consistent with effective regularisation (weight decay λwd = 10 −2, cosine annealing) and with the γ-dominance result established in Section 6.2: because normative compliance at optimal γ∗ is insensitive to λ across all 12 BATNA × λ configurations, the denoiser functions primarily as a generative prior that is steered by the guidance gradient at inference time rather than as a memorised lookup of training outcomes.                 

> Figure 2: Training convergence across all three corpora at the best-performing configuration per corpus (zero BATNA,
> λ= 0 .1; Synthetic γ∗= 2 .0; CaSiNo and DND γ∗= 5 .0). Validation MSE remains at or below training MSE through-out, consistent with effective weight-decay regularisation. Best-val checkpoints (dotted lines): 0.1767 (Synthetic), 0.0379 (CaSiNo), 0.0372 (DND). Table 3: CGD architectural dimensions applied across all experiments. The denoiser operates in a du-dimensional latent utility space per agent. Only the first component ˆui, 1serves as the scalar utility recommendation; the remaining du−1
> dimensions provide auxiliary latent capacity.

Component Hyperparameter Value GATv2 encoder Node feature dimension F 16 Attention heads H 4Output dimension dstrat 128 Dialogue encoder Model dimension dtxt 128 Transformer layers 3Vocabulary size 8,192 Cross-attention Context dimension dc 128 Attention heads 4U-Net denoiser Utility feature dim du 32 Layer widths [128, 256, 256] Bottleneck heads 8Diffusion schedule Steps T 200 

β1 1 × 10 −4

βT 2 × 10 −2

Normative guidance Equitability weight weq 0.5 Total parameters 3,350,304 

19 5.3. Evaluation Metrics 

Six metrics are computed on the held-out validation split using the full T -step reverse diffusion process. The IR rate, security gap, and symmetry gap are evaluated on the continuous recommendation ˆu0,consistent with the continuous nature of the guidance mechanism. Social welfare ( Wdisc ) and the Pareto gap ( ∆P ) are computed on the post-processed discrete allocation X∗, enabling direct comparison with baselines that operate exclusively in X . All symmetry gap values use the normalized form (Equation (33)) for all methods, including baselines, to ensure comparability across methods. The IR rate is the fraction of instances where both agents exceed their reservation thresholds: 

IR = E

" Y

> i∈N

1[ˆ ui > b i]

#

. (31) The security gap quantifies the expected shortfall below each agent’s security level: 

∆σ = E

"X

> i∈N

(σi − ˆui)+

#

. (32) The symmetry gap measures normalized utility asymmetry: 

∆eq = E

 |ˆu1 − ˆu2|

ˆu1 + ˆ u2 + ε



, (33) where ε = 10 −6 prevents division by zero. This operationalizes Definition 3.7 with joint welfare normal-ization as specified in Remark 3.9. Configurations with ∆eq > 0.15 are flagged throughout the evaluation. Social welfare is Wdisc = E[u1(X∗) + u2(X∗)] . The Pareto gap measures the fraction of maximum achievable welfare not captured: 

∆P = E

 W ∗ − (u1(X∗) + u2(X∗)) 

W ∗



, W ∗ = max  

> X′∈X

{u1(X′) + u2(X′)}, (34) where W ∗ is derived by exhaustive enumeration of X .

5.4. Baselines 

Random allocation assigns each issue uniformly at random, disregarding agent valuations and reser-vation utilities. This establishes a lower performance bound across all normative criteria. Greedy allocation assigns each issue to the agent who values it most, maximizing joint welfare through exhaustive comparison. While Pareto-efficient by construction, it systematically violates individual ra-tionality and produces highly asymmetric outcomes, establishing the welfare ceiling achievable in X .Nash Bargaining Solution (NBS) identifies the allocation maximizing the Nash product Q 

> i∈N

(ui(X)−

bi) subject to individual rationality [2]. The algorithm operates by exhaustive enumeration over all 

|X | = 8 allocations. All NBS evaluations use zero BATNA ( bi = 0 ) throughout for consistency with the CGD primary evaluation condition. Under this condition, the NBS achieves individual rationality on all evaluated instances. However, it provides no mechanism for enforcing security proximity or equitability: empirical security gaps of 0.397 (CaSiNo) and 0.635 (Deal or No Deal) and symmetry gaps exceeding 0.15 on two of three corpora confirm this structural limitation (Section 6). When X IR = ∅, the NBS is undefined [2] and reverts to a greedy allocation. Under zero BATNA this condition does not arise on 20 the evaluated corpora. Results are reported as mean ± std over three fixed seeds because seed affects the Dataset BATNA percentile estimation used in the BATNA ablation. Constrained Gradient Optimization (CGO) applies projected gradient descent directly on the norma-tive loss Lnorm in the continuous utility space R|N | without a learned generative prior. Starting from a uniform initialization in [0 .5, 1.0] 2, the optimizer runs 500 steps with learning rate 5 × 10 −2. The result-ing continuous recommendation is mapped to the nearest discrete allocation by the same post-processing step used by CGD (Equation (25)). CGO is included to test whether the learned generative prior is necessary for robust normative compliance, or whether direct constraint minimization in the continuous utility space is sufficient — a natural question given that the recommendation target is two-dimensional. This specific configuration (uniform initialization, fixed learning rate, no momentum) represents one reasonable instantiation of constrained gradient optimization; a more extensively tuned optimizer might narrow the performance gap, and the CGO results should be interpreted as evidence that naive constraint minimization is insufficient, not as an exhaustive characterisation of its limits. RNN-SL and RNN-RL [3] are dialogue agents trained exclusively on the DND corpus. RNN-SL uses supervised behavioral cloning from human negotiation traces; RNN-RL fine-tunes this model via self-play to maximize individual reward. Both are evaluated solely on DND. As neither method produces per-instance security levels, the security gap is not available ( n/a) for these baselines. The symmetry gap for both methods is computed using the normalized form (Equation (33)) applied to the per-instance utility estimates reported in [3], Table 1. To validate the choice of GATv2 over alternative graph encoders, three variants are evaluated with all other components held identical to the full CGD model. The Flat MLP variant replaces the GATv2 encoder with a multi-layer perceptron applied independently to each agent’s feature vector, with no graph structure. This tests whether the graph inductive bias contributes beyond a non-relational baseline. The GCN variant uses a graph convolutional network [34], testing whether simple symmetric aggregation is sufficient. The GAT variant uses the original Graph Attention Network [22] with static attention coeffi-cients, isolating the contribution of dynamic versus static attention. Results are reported in Section 6.3. Two ablation variants evaluate the necessity of dialogue conditioning as posited in Observation 4.3. The No-Dialogue variant eliminates the dialogue encoder and cross-attention mechanisms entirely, con-ditioning generation solely on the strategic graph embedding. The RoBERTa variant replaces the from-scratch dialogue encoder with a frozen RoBERTa-base encoder [35] coupled with a trainable linear pro-jection head. This variant explicitly tests whether pre-trained semantic representations improve social welfare over the baseline, thereby isolating whether the primary bottleneck lies in corpus informativeness or the model’s intrinsic semantic encoder capacity. Experimental results for these configurations are reported in Section 6.4. The welfare guidance term (Equation (23)) is evaluated at the best-performing checkpoint of each corpus without retraining. The hyperparameter wwelfare is swept over {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4}, maintaining adherence to the safety constraint weq + wwelfare < 1. The optimal value w∗ is the minimum wwelfare 

achieving maximum Wdisc while satisfying IR ≥ 1.0 and ∆eq ≤ 0.15 . Separately, the weighted post-processing parameter α is swept over {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}. The empirical result α∗ = 1 .0

universally across all corpora is reported in Section 6.7. 

6. Empirical Evaluation 

This section addresses five questions derived from the structural limitations and architectural choices established in the preceding sections. (Q1) Does CGD outperform established baselines on security 21 proximity and equitability simultaneously, and what is the welfare cost of normative compliance? (Q2) How sensitive are outcomes to the guidance scale γ, normative penalty weight λ, and BATNA strategy? (Q3) Does dynamic graph attention (GATv2) improve normative compliance over static-attention and non-relational encoders? (Q4) Does inference-time welfare guidance recover Pareto efficiency while pre-serving individual rationality, and can normative compliance and welfare maximization be operationally decoupled? (Q5) Under what conditions does dialogue conditioning improve welfare, and does the cross-attention architecture provide the capacity to exploit preference signals beyond declared values? (Q6) Is CGD denoising time empirically independent of the allocation space cardinality? 

6.1. Comparative Performance 

Table 4 reports baseline comparison on the Synthetic corpus. CGD achieves IR = 1.000 and a zero security gap. The Greedy baseline satisfies Pareto efficiency by construction but fails IR in 20.8% of instances, confirming the tension between efficiency and individual rationality in discrete allocation spaces. The NBS achieves IR = 1.000 under consistent zero BATNA evaluation. Its structural limitation is normative: it maximizes the Nash product subject to individual rationality only and provides no mechanism for enforcing security proximity or equitability. This produces a security gap of 0.030 and a normalized symmetry gap of 0.182 on the Synthetic corpus, both substantially higher than CGD (0.000 and 0.099, respectively). The NBS achieves higher joint welfare than CGD on all corpora under zero BATNA: the welfare cost of CGD’s normative compliance is approximately 3% on Synthetic and CaSiNo and 1% on DND. This welfare-compliance tradeoff is the correct characterization of the CGD contribution relative to NBS. The Constrained Gradient Optimization (CGO) baseline directly minimizes Lnorm in utility space without a learned prior. On Synthetic, CGO achieves IR = 0.983 but produces a symmetry gap of 0.134, near the equitability threshold. On CaSiNo, CGO violates the equitability threshold ( ∆eq = 0 .261 )despite achieving IR = 1.000. On DND, CGO fails individual rationality entirely (IR = 0.092). These failures indicate that the evaluated CGO configuration — uniform initialization without momentum or warm-starting from the training distribution — cannot replicate the contextual grounding provided by the learned generative prior across heterogeneous corpora. As noted in Section 5.4, a more extensively tuned optimizer might narrow this gap; the results establish that naive constraint minimization is insufficient, not that no constrained optimizer could approach CGD’s compliance.                                                                                              

> Table 4: Baseline comparison on the Synthetic corpus (mean ±std over 3 seeds ×60 validation instances). All symmetry gaps use the normalized metric (Eq. (33)). The best value per column is in bold .†indicates a symmetry gap exceeding the 0.15 threshold. Welfare refers to Wdisc . All methods use zero BATNA.
> Method IR ↑Sec. gap ↓Sym. gap Welfare ↑Pareto ↓
> Random 0.542 ±.040 0.217 ±.013 0.549 ±.014 †0.994 ±.010 0.233 ±.017
> Greedy 0.792 ±.008 0.084 ±.002 0.433 ±.010 †1.325 ±.012 0.063 ±.003
> NBS 1.000 ±.000 0.030 ±.003 0.182 ±.004 †1.393 ±.010 0.000 ±.000
> CGO 0.983 ±.008 0.013 ±.002 0.134 ±.012 1.360 ±.006 0.028 ±.003
> CGD 1.000 ±.000 0.000 ±.000 0.099 ±.013 1.353 ±.005 0.030 ±.003

Table 5 and Figure 3 extend this evaluation across all corpora. CGD achieves an IR rate of 1.000 on both the Synthetic and CaSiNo datasets. On DND, the three-seed mean is 0.997 ± .004 . This boundary case is theoretically consistent: while the per-step correction established in Theorem 4.2 guarantees a directional improvement at each violating step, whether these accumulated corrections across T steps suffice to fully satisfy individual rationality remains dependent on the underlying corpus distribution 22 and the calibrated value of γ. Notably, human negotiation corpora require a higher optimal guidance scale ( γ∗ = 5 .0) than synthetic data ( γ∗ = 2 .0). This differential quantifies the degree to which human bargaining behavior diverges from strict game-theoretic rationality.                

> Figure 3: Best-configuration CGD metrics across three corpora (zero BATNA, λ= 0 .1; Synthetic γ∗= 2 .0; CaSiNo and DND γ∗= 5 .0; mean over 3 seeds). The dotted line in the Symmetry Gap panel marks the 0.15 equitability threshold. IR rate: 1.000 (Synthetic, CaSiNo) and 0.997 (DND). Security gap: 0.000 (Synthetic), 0.008 (CaSiNo), 0.009 (DND). Symmetry gap: 0.099, 0.021, 0.006, all within the threshold. Joint surplus ( Wdisc ): 1.353, 1.071, 1.351. Pareto gap: 0.030, 0.028, 0.027. Table 5: CGD best-configuration results (mean ±std over 3 seeds). All symmetry gaps satisfy the 0.15 threshold. Welfare refers to Wdisc . Results are identical across all 12 BATNA ×λconfigurations per corpus (Section 6.2).

Corpus BATNA λ γ∗ IR ↑ Sec. gap ↓ Sym. gap Welfare ↑ Pareto ↓

Synthetic zero 0.1 2.0 1.000 ± .000 0.000 ± .000 0.099 ± .013 1.353 ± .005 0.030 ± .003 

CaSiNo zero 0.1 5.0 1.000 ± .000 0.008 ± .001 0.021 ± .002 1.071 ± .003 0.028 ± .002 

DND zero 0.1 5.0 0.997 ± .004 0.009 ± .002 0.006 ± .001 1.351 ± .001 0.027 ± .001 

6.2. Ablation Study 6.2.1. Effect of the Guidance Scale γ

The guidance scale γ is the primary inference-time parameter for normative steering (Figure 4). At 

γ = 0 , IR rates collapse to 0.49, 0.07, and 0.04 on Synthetic, CaSiNo, and DND respectively. Synthetic and CaSiNo recover to IR ≈ 1.000 by γ = 1 .0; DND requires γ = 5 .0. The security gap decreases monotonically with γ across all corpora: from 0.22 at γ = 0 to zero at γ ≈ 1.0 on Synthetic, and from initial highs of 0.90 (CaSiNo) and 0.70 (DND) to 0.008–0.011 at γ = 5 . Consequently, γ = 5 .0 is adopted as the default for human corpora and γ = 2 .0 for synthetic data. 

6.2.2. Effect of λ and BATNA Strategy 

All three BATNA strategies produce overlapping flat IR profiles at 1.000 for Synthetic and CaSiNo across all tested λ values. For DND, profiles plateau at ≈ 0.83 at γ = 2 .0, confirming that guidance scale rather than BATNA calibration or normative penalty weight is the sole normative control parameter. Security gap variance across BATNA strategies is on the order of 10 −7 to 10 −9. All 36 BATNA × λ config-urations at optimal γ∗ yield identical metrics per corpus (Table 6), confirming γ-dominance throughout. 

6.3. Graph Encoder Ablation 

Table 7 reports four encoder variants evaluated with all other components held identical at each corpus’s optimal γ∗. The GATv2 values are taken from the main ablation (Table 5); the three alternative encoders are from the standalone ablation at 20 epochs. 23 Figure 4: Guidance scale γ sweep across corpora. Metrics evaluated at γ ∈ {0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0}, averaged over the BATNA × λ grid (shaded area: ±1 std). IR: Synthetic and CaSiNo reach 1.000 by γ = 1 .0; DND requires γ = 5 .0.Security gap: falls from [0 .22 , 0.90] at γ = 0 to [0 .000 , 0.011] at γ = 5 . All corpora satisfy ∆eq ≤ 0.15 at γ = 5 .0.Table 6: Full ablation results (mean ± std over 3 seeds, at optimal γ∗). One representative row is displayed per corpus grouping as all 12 BATNA × λ configurations produce identical results. 

Corpus BATNA λ γ∗ IR ↑ Sec. gap ↓ Sym. gap Welfare ↑ Pareto ↓

Synthetic 

zero 0.1 2.0 

1.000 ± .000 0.000 ± .000 0.111 ± .013 1.352 ± .005 0.030 ± .003 floor 0.1 2.0 dataset 0.1 2.0 

CaSiNo 

zero 0.1 5.0 

1.000 ± .000 0.008 ± .001 0.020 ± .002 1.069 ± .003 0.030 ± .002 floor 0.1 5.0 dataset 0.1 5.0 

DND 

zero 0.1 5.0 

0.997 ± .004 0.009 ± .002 0.006 ± .001 1.351 ± .001 0.027 ± .001 floor 0.1 5.0 dataset 0.1 5.0 

The Flat MLP encoder, which applies an MLP independently to each agent without message passing, produces the highest security gaps across all corpora, confirming that the graph inductive bias contributes beyond a non-relational baseline. The GCN encoder achieves lower security gaps than Flat MLP but substantially lower welfare on CaSiNo (0.939) and DND (1.250) than GATv2 (1.071 and 1.351 respec-tively). The original GAT encoder with static attention improves over GCN on DND but does not match GATv2 on any metric. GATv2 achieves the lowest security gap and highest welfare on CaSiNo and DND, where preference asymmetries are strongest. The improvement from GAT to GATv2 is most pronounced on DND: se-curity gap falls from 0.207 to 0.009 and welfare rises from 1.227 to 1.351, supporting the argument in Section 4.2 that dynamic attention is necessary to represent the comparative bilateral preference signal. 24 On Synthetic, all four encoders perform equivalently, confirming that the GATv2 advantage is tied to preference asymmetry rather than general model capacity. The higher GATv2 symmetry gap on Synthetic (0.099 versus 0.022–0.024) reflects the structural Pareto–equitability tension in the permutation-based generator; all values satisfy the 0.15 threshold.    

> Table 7: Graph encoder ablation. All variants use zero BATNA, λ= 0 .1, and optimal γ∗.

Corpus Encoder IR ↑ Sec. gap ↓ Sym. gap Welfare ↑ Pareto ↓

Synthetic 

Flat MLP 1.000 0.0001 0.0237 1.340 ± .003 0.0099 

GCN 1.000 0.0002 0.0224 1.340 ± .001 0.0098 

GAT 1.000 0.0001 0.0227 1.340 ± .002 0.0100 

GATv2 1.000 0.000 0.099 1.353 ± .005 0.030 

CaSiNo 

Flat MLP 1.000 0.0041 0.0787 0.930 ± .006 0.1510 

GCN 1.000 0.0053 0.0922 0.939 ± .004 0.1430 

GAT 1.000 0.0052 0.0883 0.931 ± .004 0.1501 

GATv2 1.000 0.0080 0.021 1.071 ± .003 0.028 

DND 

Flat MLP 1.000 0.2247 0.1054 1.212 ± .024 0.0856 

GCN 1.000 0.1686 0.1018 1.250 ± .017 0.0610 

GAT 1.000 0.2067 0.1047 1.227 ± .027 0.0763 

GATv2 0.997 0.009 0.006 1.351 ± .001 0.027 

6.4. Dialogue Conditioning 

This paragraph addresses Q5. The cross-attention architecture introduced in Contribution C1 pro-vides the representational capacity to exploit latent preference signals beyond the declared value ma-trix V, provided those signals are embedded within the dialogue text. Realizing this capacity requires two separable conditions to hold simultaneously: the corpus must carry recoverable preference signals independent of V, and the encoder must possess sufficient semantic competence to extract them. To probe these underlying conditions, we design two distinct experiments: an ablation study on the main corpora to evaluate whether either condition holds at current training scales, and a controlled experiment that explicitly isolates the architectural contribution by constructing a setting where the first condition is guaranteed to hold by design. 

6.4.1. Ablation on Main Corpora 

Three encoder variants are compared: Full CGD with a from-scratch transformer encoder, No-Dialogue conditioning on the strategic graph only, and RoBERTa using a frozen RoBERTa-base encoder with a trainable projection head. Normative compliance metrics are identical across all three variants, confirming that the guidance mechanism is the sole source of normative compliance and is independent of the dialogue encoder. Welfare differences are therefore the only meaningful discriminator. On Synthetic, all three variants produce equivalent welfare ( |∆W | ≤ 0.011 ), consistent with the neg-ative control. On CaSiNo, ∆W = 0 .000 between RoBERTa and No-Dialogue. On DND, RoBERTa marginally outperforms No-Dialogue ( ∆W = +0 .009 ) but cross-seed standard deviation of ±.034 makes this statistically uncertain. Neither from-scratch training on 300–800 instances nor frozen pre-trained representations produce welfare improvements over the value-matrix-only baseline on the evaluated cor-pora. This null result is consistent with either separable condition failing: the CaSiNo and DND dialogues may not carry recoverable preference signals beyond V at current corpus scales, or the encoder variants may lack the semantic competence to extract them even if such signals exist. The controlled experiment in Section 6.4.2 is designed to distinguish these explanations. 25 Table 8: Dialogue conditioning ablation (mean ± std, 3 seeds). ∆W is relative to No-Dialogue. Normative compliance metrics are identical across all variants and are omitted; see Table 5 for full CGD results. 

Corpus Encoder Welfare ↑ ∆W Sym. gap 

Synthetic 

Full CGD 1.349 ± .002 −0.011 0.108 

No-Dialogue 1.360 ± .002 — 0.100 

RoBERTa 1.362 ± .001 +0 .002 0.098 

CaSiNo 

Full CGD 1.076 ± .006 +0 .000 0.023 

No-Dialogue 1.076 ± .002 — 0.022 

RoBERTa 1.073 ± .006 −0.003 0.024 

DND 

Full CGD 1.351 ± .017 +0 .004 0.006 

No-Dialogue 1.347 ± .010 — 0.006 

RoBERTa 1.356 ± .034 +0 .009 0.007 

6.4.2. Capacity Confirmation Under Strategic Misrepresentation 

The null result on real corpora leaves both explanations open. Resolving this requires a setting with known ground truth. Agents’ true preferences must be known independently of their declarations. Neither CaSiNo nor DND provides this ground truth. A controlled experiment is therefore constructed. Each agent’s declared value vector has its top-two preferences swapped. This swap occurs with a probability of {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}. Meanwhile, the dialogue encodes the true rank order. A model conditioned only on declarations fails here. It systematically recommends the wrong allocation on swapped instances. Amodel that reads the dialogue can correct this error. Normative guidance is disabled during this test. This explicitly isolates the representational contribution of the dialogue encoder. Figure 5 reports the findings. Full CGD achieves higher true welfare than No-Dialogue across all three swap levels ( ∆Jtrue ∈ [0 .008 , 0.015] , all exceeding the 0.005 significance threshold over three seeds), confirming that the cross-attention architecture can exploit dialogue signals when they are present and decodable. The welfare advantage does not grow monotonically with swap probability and the greedy-match rate is marginally lower for Full CGD, indicating that the advantage arises from richer cross-agent representational interactions rather than lexical preference decoding. This result isolates corpus informativeness rather than encoder capacity as the binding constraint for the real-data null result: the architecture is capable of exploiting dialogue signals in the controlled setting; what is absent from CaSiNo and DND at current scales is a sufficiently recoverable preference signal beyond V . Pre-trained encoder integration with fine-tuning on corpora documenting strategic misrepresentation constitutes the primary path to realising this capacity on real negotiation data. 

6.5. Scalability Analysis 

Table 9 and Figure 6 address Q6. CGD denoising time remains constant at approximately 350 ms across all |J | values, consistent with the O(T · | θ|) bound of Proposition 4.4. NBS enumeration time grows from 0.05 ms at |J | = 3 to 6.15 ms at |J | = 10 , a 123-fold increase consistent with exponential growth in |X | . Post-processing time grows modestly (15 ms to 20 ms). The crossover point at which NBS enumeration time would exceed CGD denoising time is estimated at |J | ≈ 17 by extrapolation; this estimate is based entirely on synthetic data. IR = 1.000 is maintained across all |J | values on synthetic data, confirming that normative guidance remains effective as the allocation space grows in this controlled setting. 26 0.0 0.5 1.0 

Swap probability (misrepresentation level) 

> 1.33
> 1.34
> 1.35
> 1.36
> 1.37
> True welfare (J_true)

True Welfare vs Misrepresentation   

> Full CGD
> No-Dialogue
> swap=0.0 swap=0.5 swap=1.0
> 0.04
> 0.02
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> (FullCGD  No-Dialogue)

Dialogue Advantage vs Misrepresentation 

> J_true
> GreedyMatch

PoC: Dialogue Conditioning Under Rank-Swap Misrepresentation Figure 5: Dialogue conditioning under rank-swap misrepresentation. Left : True welfare Jtrue across three misrepresentation levels (mean ± std, 3 seeds, γ = 0 ). Full CGD consistently exceeds No-Dialogue. Right : ∆Jtrue and ∆GreedyMatch. All ∆Jtrue bars exceed the 0.005 significance threshold (dashed line); ∆GreedyMatch bars are near zero, indicating the advantage arises from representational interactions rather than lexical preference decoding. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                   

> Number of issues J
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Time per instance (ms, log scale)
> Inference Time vs J
> NBS enumeration
> CGD denoising
> Post-processing
> 345678910
> Number of issues J
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Metric value
> Normative Compliance vs J
> IR rate
> Sym gap
> Sym threshold
> 345678910
> Number of issues J
> 1.36
> 1.38
> 1.40
> 1.42
> 1.44
> Discrete welfare (W_disc)
> Joint Welfare vs J |X|=8 |X|=32 |X|=128 |X|=1024
> CGD Scalability Analysis: Variable Number of Issues

Figure 6: Scalability analysis across |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 } on synthetic data. Left : CGD denoising time is constant at ≈ 350 ms while NBS enumeration time grows exponentially (log scale). Centre : IR rate and symmetry gap remain stable as |J | 

increases. Right : Discrete welfare Wdisc varies with |J | due to changing preference structure rather than model degradation. Table 9: Scalability experiment (synthetic data). CGD denoising time and NBS enumeration time reported per instance in milliseconds. The crossover estimate at |J | ≈ 17 is an extrapolation from these four data points. 

|J | |X | NBS (ms) CGD (ms) Post (ms) Ratio IR Welfare 

3 8 0.05 356 15 0.00014 × 1.000 1.349 5 32 0.18 349 13 0.00052 × 1.000 1.424 7 128 0.72 347 14 0.00208 × 1.000 1.384 10 1024 6.15 364 20 0.01690 × 1.000 1.441 

6.6. State-of-the-Art Comparison 

Table 10 presents the full comparative evaluation under zero BATNA. CGD is, to our knowledge, the first NSS to simultaneously achieve IR ≥ 0.997 , security gap ≤ 0.009 , and symmetry gap ≤ 0.15 across all three evaluated corpora. The key finding is normative. NBS achieves higher joint welfare than CGD on all corpora but produces 27 security gaps of 0.030 (Synthetic), 0.397 (CaSiNo), and 0.635 (DND), exceeding CGD’s values by 5 ×,49 ×, and 70 × respectively, and violates the equitability threshold on two of three corpora. CGD enforces all three normative criteria simultaneously at a welfare cost of 1–3%, establishing the welfare-compliance tradeoff that defines the framework’s operational role relative to the NBS. CGO confirms that the evaluated naive constraint minimization configuration cannot replicate the normative compliance provided by the learned generative prior. On DND, CGO fails individual rationality entirely (IR = 0.092). On CaSiNo, CGO violates the equitability threshold ( ∆eq = 0 .261 ). On Synthetic, CGO only marginally satisfies equitability (0.134). The learned distribution over successful negotiated outcomes provides contextual grounding absent from the uniform-initialized gradient descent baseline. On DND, reward-maximizing fine-tuning in RNN-RL increases the symmetry gap 28-fold relative to RNN-SL (from 0.009 to 0.257). CGD achieves a symmetry gap of 0.006 while satisfying IR and security constraints, and Wdisc = 1 .351 , a 19.6% welfare improvement over RNN-RL (1.130).                                                                                                                                                            

> Table 10: State-of-the-art comparison (zero BATNA throughout). †:values approximated from [3]. n/a:security gap unavailable. CGD values: mean ±std over three seeds.
> Corpus Method IR ↑Sec. gap ↓Sym. gap Welfare ↑
> DND
> RNN-SL 0.879 †n/a0.009 †1.090 †
> RNN-RL 0.899 †n/a0.257 †1.130 †
> NBS 1.000 ±.000 0.635 ±.012 0.136 ±.003 1.365 ±.008
> CGO 0.092 ±.011 0.323 ±.018 0.111 ±.009 1.353 ±.007
> CGD 0.997 ±.004 0.009 ±.002 0.006 ±.001 1.351 ±.001
> CaSiNo
> NBS 1.000 ±.000 0.397 ±.008 0.283 ±.005 1.103 ±.009
> CGO 1.000 ±.000 0.203 ±.014 0.261 ±.011 1.094 ±.006
> CGD 1.000 ±.000 0.008 ±.001 0.021 ±.002 1.071 ±.003
> Synth.
> Random 0.542 ±.040 0.217 ±.013 0.549 ±.014 †0.994 ±.010
> Greedy 0.792 ±.008 0.084 ±.002 0.433 ±.010 †1.325 ±.012
> NBS 1.000 ±.000 0.030 ±.003 0.182 ±.004 †1.393 ±.010
> CGO 0.983 ±.008 0.013 ±.002 0.134 ±.012 1.360 ±.006
> CGD 1.000 ±.000 0.000 ±.000 0.099 ±.013 1.353 ±.005

Chawla et al. [19] and Kwon et al. [8] are excluded from numerical comparison due to incommensurable measurement scales. The symmetry recovery in [19] is empirical rather than guaranteed and does not address security proximity. The ASTRA agent [8] achieves competitive individual utility but exhibits nontrivial walk-away rates, precluding bilateral IR guarantees. 

6.7. Welfare Guidance 

This subsection addresses Q4 and provides the primary empirical evidence for Contribution C2. Weighted post-processing confirms that reducing α below 1.0 degrades IR on Synthetic and DND imme-diately and produces symmetry gaps above 0.15 on CaSiNo, with α∗ = 1 .0 optimal universally. The welfare guidance weight wwelfare (Figure 7) is swept from 0 to 0.4 at each corpus’s optimal checkpoint. The IR rate remains at 1.000 throughout the safe region, empirically validating the safety constraint of Equation (24). Welfare guidance yields absolute gains of +0 .028 (+2.1%) on Synthetic and 

+0 .032 (+3.0%) on CaSiNo (Table 11). On CaSiNo, w∗ = 0 .3 recovers full Pareto efficiency ( ∆P = 0 .000 )while strictly preserving IR = 1.000, the core empirical result of Contribution C2. This demonstrates 28 that normative compliance and welfare maximization are operationally decoupled within a single infer-ence pipeline: the primary guidance gradient unconditionally enforces all normative constraints, and the welfare term then steers toward the Pareto frontier subject to those constraints remaining satisfied, without modifying model weights. The marginal DND gain ( +0 .001 ) reflects proximity to the discrete welfare ceiling rather than a limitation of the mechanism.                          

> Figure 7: Welfare guidance sweep ( wwelfare ). Red shading: unsafe region ( weq +wwelfare ≥1). IR remains at 1.000 throughout the safe region. At w≥0.3, CaSiNo achieves ∆P= 0 .000 .Table 11: Welfare guidance results (Contribution C2). Baseline: α= 1 ,wwelfare = 0 .W2: welfare guidance at w∗.†
> denotes Pareto efficiency on CaSiNo at w∗= 0 .3.

Corpus Baseline W2 w∗ ∆W ∆P IR 

Synthetic 1.353 ± .005 1.381 0.3 +0 .028 0.011 1.000 CaSiNo 1.071 ± .003 1.103 0.3 +0 .032 0.000 † 1.000 DND 1.351 ± .001 1.352 0.4 +0 .001 0.026 1.000 

29 6.8. Theoretical Confirmation 

The empirical results address each theoretical claim directly. Theorem 4.2 (Contribution C1) provides a per-step directional guarantee: at each reverse diffusion step where individual rationality is violated, the guidance correction strictly increases the violating agent’s utility given a sufficient guidance scale γ. This directional mechanism is empirically validated by the monotonic convergence of the IR rate as a function of γ across all evaluated corpora (Figure 4), which is consistent with the per-step corrections accumulating successfully across the T reverse steps. The marginal deviation observed on DND ( IR = 0 .997 ±.004 ) reflects seed-level corpus variance. This variance establishes that achieving a perfect empirical IR rate depends on whether these per-step corrections accumulate sufficiently at a calibrated γ, rather than being a direct algebraic consequence of the theorem itself. Ultimately, the theorem formalizes the underlying directional mechanism, while the empirical results confirm that standard calibration remains sufficient across diverse negotiation distributions. Contribution C2 is confirmed by Table 11: welfare guidance at w∗ = 0 .3 recovers ∆P = 0 .000 on CaSiNo while IR remains at 1.000 across all tested weights within the safe region, empirically validat-ing the safety constraint of Equation (24) and demonstrating the operational decoupling of normative compliance from welfare maximization. The dialogue capacity in Contribution C1 is validated through two complementary findings that align with our two-condition framework. First, the ablation study on the main corpora establishes that neither encoder variant yields social welfare improvements on the evaluated real-world datasets. This null result indicates that at least one of the two separable conditions fails to hold at current deployment scales. These conditions are corpus informativeness and encoder semantic competence. Second, the controlled misrepresentation experiment confirms the positive direction of this capacity. When the dialogue text is explicitly informative by design, Full CGD achieves strictly higher true welfare ( ∆Jtrue > 0.005 ) than the No-Dialogue variant across all test conditions. This explicitly demonstrates that the cross-attention architectural capacity exists. It thereby isolates corpus informativeness, rather than encoder capacity, as the binding constraint for the real-data null result. Proposition 4.4 (Contribution C3) predicts an O(T · | θ|) denoising cost that is entirely independent of the discrete allocation space X . Table 9 confirms this behavior by demonstrating a constant denoising time across item sets |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 }. In contrast, the NBS enumeration time grows 123-fold over the same range, closely corroborating the proposition. These initial scaling results are evaluated on synthetic data. 

7. Discussion 

The empirical evaluation confirms that continuous utility relaxation circumvents discrete infeasibility, while inference-time normative guidance enforces individual rationality (IR), security proximity, and equitability across synthetic and human-generated corpora. Furthermore, normative compliance and welfare maximization can be operationally decoupled within a single inference pipeline without model retraining. The central finding of this work is fundamentally normative rather than welfare-based. Under con-sistent zero BATNA evaluation, the Nash Bargaining Solution (NBS) achieves higher joint welfare than CGD across all three corpora by approximately 3% on Synthetic and CaSiNo, and 1% on DND. CGD does not claim to maximize welfare over the NBS; its contribution is the simultaneous enforcement of security proximity and equitability, which the NBS structurally cannot provide. NBS security gaps of 30 0.397 on CaSiNo and 0.635 on DND exceed CGD’s values by 49 × and 70 × respectively, confirming this distinction. The 1–3% welfare cost of normative compliance represents the primary tradeoff between the two systems. Theorem 4.2 provides a per-step directional guarantee: at each reverse diffusion step t where agent 

i violates individual rationality, the guidance correction strictly increases ˆui, 1 provided γ ≥ γ∗. Three qualifications follow from this scope. First, the theorem does not guarantee that the final accumulated output ˆu0 satisfies IR. Whether per-step corrections accumulate sufficiently depends on the training distribution, the number of diffusion steps T , and the calibrated value of γ. The empirical IR rates of 1.000 on Synthetic and CaSiNo and 0.997 on DND confirm that calibrated γ produces adequate accumulation on the evaluated corpora. Second, trajectory oscillation is not precluded. The guarantee operates strictly per-step: the DDPM update at step t − 1 may reduce utility before the guidance correction at that step is applied. Global convergence is not asserted. Third, the post-processing step (Equation (25)) may select a discrete allocation that violates IR even when the continuous recommendation ˆu0 satisfies it. Under zero BATNA evaluation this projection gap is empirically negligible, with discrete IR reaching 1.000 across all three corpora. Under realistic proportional BATNA thresholds, the gap becomes corpus-dependent. Discrete bargaining methods such as the NBS cannot apply analogous corrections. When the feasible IR set XIR = ∅, no element of the discrete space satisfies individual rationality, leaving the NBS undefined. Because CGD operates in R|N | , which always contains IR-satisfying vectors, the per-step correction is never structurally impeded. Consequently, CGD always produces a recommendation regardless of whether a feasible discrete allocation exists. The Constraint Guided Optimization (CGO) ablation confirms that the learned generative prior is not redundant. Naive constraint minimization from a uniform initialization fails individual rationality entirely on DND and violates the equitability threshold on CaSiNo, despite applying the same normative objectives as CGD. The learned distribution over successful negotiated outcomes provides contextual grounding that direct gradient descent cannot replicate across heterogeneous corpora. This addresses the necessity of the DDPM architecture for what is formally a low-dimensional recommendation problem. The training convergence curves in Figure 2 provide complementary evidence. Validation MSE remains at or below training MSE throughout all 20 epochs across all three corpora. This pattern is consistent with effective regularization through weight decay ( λwd = 10 −2) and cosine annealing. It is also consistent with the γ-dominance result: because normative compliance at optimal γ∗ is insensitive to loss weights 

λ across all 12 BATNA × λ configurations, the denoiser functions primarily as a generative prior whose normative alignment is achieved at inference time. The model learns an underlying distribution over successful outcomes that the guidance gradient then steers toward the normative feasible region. The 2.5 × guidance scale differential between synthetic and human corpora ( γ∗ = 2 .0 versus γ∗ = 5 .0)quantifies the degree to which human negotiation behavior departs from strict game-theoretic rationality. Once γ is appropriately calibrated, BATNA strategy and loss weight λ produce negligible differential effects across all 36 tested configurations. The guidance scale is therefore the sole normative control pa-rameter at inference time. This simplifies deployment: practitioners need only tune γ, and the sensitivity of all normative metrics to this single parameter is monotone and interpretable from Figure 4. Normative compliance and welfare maximization are operationally separable within a single inference pipeline. On CaSiNo, setting w∗ = 0 .3 recovers full Pareto efficiency ( ∆P = 0 .000 ) while strictly pre-serving IR = 1 .000 . The primary guidance gradient enforces individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability unconditionally. The welfare term then steers the trajectory toward the Pareto frontier subject to those constraints remaining satisfied, removing the need for model retraining. The safety constraint weq + wwelfare < 1 (Equation (24)) ensures that the IR correction remains dominant whenever 31 a violation occurs. The IR rate remains at 1.000 throughout the safe region across all tested values of 

wwelfare , empirically validating this constraint. The welfare guidance mechanism operates as a gradient heuristic and does not carry the axiomatic foundations of cooperative game theory; its practical utility lies entirely in the operational decoupling it enables. The graph encoder ablation validates the GATv2 choice on corpora where preference asymmetries are strongest. The improvement from GAT to GATv2 on DND is pronounced: the security gap falls from 0.207 to 0.009 and welfare rises from 1.227 to 1.351. This supports the premise that dynamic attention is necessary to represent comparative bilateral preference signals. Static attention coefficients, computed independently for each node, cannot directly encode the joint comparison of agent preferences that determines efficient assignment. On Synthetic, all four encoder variants perform equivalently. This confirms that the GATv2 advantage is tied to preference asymmetry rather than general model capacity. The higher symmetry gap of GATv2 on Synthetic (0.099 versus 0.022–0.024) reflects the structural Pareto-equitability tension in the permutation-based generator, though all values remain within the acceptable 0.15 threshold. Realizing the dialogue capacity requires two separable conditions to hold simultaneously: the corpus must carry recoverable preference signals beyond the declared value matrix V, and the encoder must possess sufficient semantic competence to extract those signals. Neither encoder variant produces welfare improvements over the value-matrix-only baseline on CaSiNo or DND. The controlled misrepresentation experiment isolates the cause of this null result by constructing a setting where the first condition holds by definition: the dialogue explicitly encodes true preferences while declarations are systematically mis-represented. Full CGD achieves strictly higher true welfare than No-Dialogue across all three swap levels (∆Jtrue ∈ [0 .008 , 0.015] ). The architecture is therefore capable of exploiting dialogue signals when they are present. This result identifies corpus informativeness, rather than encoder capacity, as the binding constraint for the real-data null result. The CaSiNo and DND dialogues do not carry preference sig-nals that are recoverable beyond V at current training scales. Pre-trained encoder integration coupled with fine-tuning on corpora documenting strategic misrepresentation offers the primary path to realizing dialogue capacity on real negotiation data. Proposition 4.4 establishes that CGD denoising cost is O(T ·| θ|), independent of the discrete allocation space X . However, the post-processing step retains exponential dependence on the number of items |J | .Continuous relaxation therefore shifts the exponential bottleneck from the optimization phase to the post-processing phase rather than eliminating it entirely. Figure 6 and Table 9 confirm this empirically. Denoising time remains constant at approximately 350 ms across |J | ∈ { 3, 5, 7, 10 } and all corpora. Conversely, NBS enumeration time grows 123-fold over the same range, consistent with exponential growth. Post-processing time also grows with |J | but remains under 25 ms throughout the evaluated range. An IR = 1 .000 is maintained across all |J | values and all corpora, confirming that normative guidance remains effective as the allocation space grows. The crossover point at which NBS enumeration time exceeds CGD denoising time is estimated at |J | ≈ 17 by extrapolation. Beyond this point, exhaustive discrete search becomes the bottleneck for the NBS while CGD denoising remains constant. Developing sub-exponential projection heuristics for the post-processing step remains an open direction to alleviate this remaining exponential cost. Four primary limitations bound this framework. First, continuous relaxation eliminates hard solver failures but cannot recover an IR-feasible discrete allocation when none exists in X . In such cases, the projection step produces the nearest feasible allocation to the continuous recommendation, minimizing but not eliminating the residual IR gap. Second, while the denoising inference cost is independent of the allocation space, post-processing retains an exponential dependence on |J | , with a practical crossover 32 estimated at |J | ≈ 17 . Third, Theorem 4.2 provides a per-step directional guarantee rather than a global convergence guarantee. Generalization of empirical IR rates to other distributions is not guaranteed by the theorem alone. Fourth, the welfare guidance mechanism operates as a gradient heuristic without the axiomatic foundations of cooperative bargaining theory, relying instead on empirical validation of its operational decoupling performance. 

8. Conclusion 

This study introduces the CGD framework, a NSS that generates allocation recommendations in a continuous bilateral utility space. A GATv2 strategic encoder captures bilateral preference structure through dynamic attention, while a cross-attention mechanism fuses these representations with dialogue context. A DDPM denoiser then generates recommendations conditioned on the fused representation, utilizing an analytically derived inference-time guidance gradient to enforce individual rationality, security proximity, and equitability without altering model weights. CGD simultaneously achieves IR ≥ 0.997 , security gap ≤ 0.009 , and symmetry gap ≤ 0.15 across multiple evaluated corpora, including real-world dialogue datasets. While the NBS achieves higher joint welfare, it produces severe security gaps on CaSiNo (0.397) and DND (0.635)—exceeding CGD’s values by 49 × and 70 × respectively—and violates equitability on two of the three corpora. CGD successfully enforces all three normative criteria simultaneously at a minor welfare cost of 1–3%. Welfare guidance at w∗ = 0 .3 recovers Pareto efficiency on CaSiNo at inference time while strictly preserving IR = 1 .000 . This demonstrates that normative compliance and welfare maximization can be operationally decoupled within a single inference pipeline without modifying model weights. The pri-mary guidance gradient enforces normative constraints unconditionally, while the welfare term maximizes overall welfare subject to those constraints remaining satisfied. Dialogue conditioning experiments establish both sides of the capacity boundary. The cross-attention architecture successfully exploits dialogue signals when present, as confirmed under controlled misrepre-sentation conditions. However, this capacity is not realized on the evaluated real-world corpora, indicating that corpus informativeness, rather than encoder capacity, remains the binding constraint. Three directions for future work follow. First, pre-trained encoder integration with fine-tuning on strategic misrepresentation data offers a path to unlocking dialogue capacity on real-world text. Second, evaluation on corpora with larger item sets will further test the constant-time inference advantage where exhaustive NBS enumeration is practically infeasible. Finally, extending the framework to multiparty negotiations will require generalizing the normative guidance gradient to enforce pairwise equitability across all participant pairs. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The author declares that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Declaration of Generative AI and AI Assisted Technologies in the Writing Process 

During the preparation of this work the author used generative artificial intelligence technologies solely to improve language clarity and readability. After using these tools, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the final content of the publication. 33 Data Availability 

The empirical datasets analyzed during the current study, specifically the CaSiNo human negotiation corpus and the Deal or No Deal corpus, are publicly available from their respective original creators. The synthetic utility dataset generated during the current study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 

Code Availability 

The computational code required to reproduce the guided graph diffusion framework, the baseline models, and the experimental results presented in this study is available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. 

References 

[1] T. Baarslag, M. J. C. Hendrikx, K. V. Hindriks, C. M. Jonker, Learning about the opponent in auto-mated bilateral negotiation: a comprehensive survey of opponent modeling techniques, Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 30 (5) (2016) 849–898. doi:10.1007/s10458-015-9309-1 .[2] J. F. Nash, The bargaining problem, Econometrica 18 (2) (1950) 155–162. doi:10.2307/1907266 .[3] M. Lewis, D. Yarats, Y. Dauphin, D. Parikh, D. Batra, Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning of negotiation dialogues, in: M. Palmer, R. Hwa, S. Riedel (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2017, pp. 2443–2453. doi:10.18653/v1/D17-1259 .URL https://aclanthology.org/D17-1259/ 

[4] K. Chawla, J. Ramirez, R. Clever, G. Lucas, J. May, J. Gratch, Casino: A corpus of campsite negotiation dialogues for automatic negotiation systems, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), 2021, pp. 3167–3185. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.254 .[5] Y. Chevaleyre, P. E. Dunne, U. Endriss, J. Lang, M. Lemaître, N. Maudet, J. Padget, S. Phelps, J. A. Rodríguez-Aguilar, P. Sousa, Issues in multiagent resource allocation, Informatica 30 (1) (2006). URL https://www.informatica.si/index.php/informatica/article/view/70 

[6] B. M. Renting, T. M. Moerland, H. H. Hoos, C. M. Jonker, Towards general negotiation strategies with end-to-end reinforcement learning (2024). arXiv:2406.15096 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15096 

[7] F. Bianchi, P. J. Chia, M. Yuksekgonul, J. Tagliabue, D. Jurafsky, J. Zou, How well can llms nego-tiate? negotiationarena platform and analysis, in: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24, JMLR.org, 2024. [8] D. Kwon, J. Hae, E. Clift, D. Shamsoddini, J. Gratch, G. Lucas, ASTRA: A negotiation agent with adaptive and strategic reasoning via tool-integrated action for dynamic offer optimization, in: C. Christodoulopoulos, T. Chakraborty, C. Rose, V. Peng (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 2025, pp. 16217–16238. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.821 .URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.821/ 

34 [9] M. Janner, Y. Du, J. Tenenbaum, S. Levine, Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 9902–9915. [10] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, S. Song, Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion, The International Journal of Robotics Research 44 (10-11) (2025) 1684–1704. doi:10.1177/02783649241273668 .URL https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/02783649241273668 

[11] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, in: Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2006.11239 .[12] J. Ho, T. Salimans, Classifier-free diffusion guidance (2022). arXiv:2207.12598 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598 

[13] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006, see Dirichlet distribution in Section 2.2. [14] P. Bagga, N. Paoletti, K. Stathis, Deep learnable strategy templates for multi-issue bilateral negoti-ation, in: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’22, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC, 2022, p. 1533–1535. [15] X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Dou, Autonomous negotiation via deep reinforcement learning agents: Efficiency, fairness, and mechanisms, SSRN Electronic JournalAvailable at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=6007494 (February 2026). doi:10.2139/ssrn.6007494 .URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=6007494 

[16] K. Nakamura, Collective or individual rationality in the nash bargaining solution: efficiency-free char-acterizations, Social Choice and Welfare 62 (2024) 629–642. doi:10.1007/s00355-024-01513-6 .[17] Y. Zeng, X. Yang, L. Chen, C. C. Ferrer, M. Jin, M. I. Jordan, R. Jia, Fairness-aware meta-learning via nash bargaining, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024) 83235–83267. [18] J. Wu, Y. Sun, An automated negotiation model based on agents’ attribute preference with emo-tional deception, Expert Systems with Applications 278 (2025) 127448. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2025. 127448 .[19] K. Chawla, I. Wu, Y. Rong, G. Lucas, J. Gratch, Be selfish, but wisely: Investigating the impact of agent personality in mixed-motive human-agent interactions, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Singapore, 2023, pp. 13078–13092. 

doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.808 .[20] A. Bhattacharya, G. Svedas, A. Lyskov, M. Strasser, L. Barberis Canonico, Evaluating negotiation capabilities of large language models: From ultimatum games to nash bargaining, in: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, Vol. 69, SAGE Publications, 2025, pp. 1881–1886. [21] Y. Fu, X. Liu, B. Yu, Pd-gatv2: positive difference second generation graph attention network based on multi-granularity in information systems for classification, Applied Intelligence 54 (2024) 5081–5096. doi:10.1007/s10489-024-05432-y .[22] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, Y. Bengio, Graph attention networks, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1710. 10903 .35 [23] S. Brody, U. Alon, E. Yahav, How attentive are graph attention networks?, in: International Con-ference on Learning Representations, 2022. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2105.14491 .[24] L. Faber, R. Wattenhofer, Gwac: Gnns with asynchronous communication, in: S. Villar, B. Cham-berlain (Eds.), Proceedings of the Second Learning on Graphs Conference, Vol. 231 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2024, pp. 8:1–8:20. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v231/faber24a.html 

[25] W. Li, Efficient planning with latent diffusion, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00311 (2023). [26] Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, H. He, Y. Zhong, S. Zhang, H. Guo, T. Chen, W. Zhang, Diffusion models for reinforcement learning: A survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01223 (2023). [27] J. Zhang, L. Zhao, A. Papachristodoulou, J. Umenberger, Constrained diffusers for safe planning and control, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2025, poster. URL https://neurips.cc/virtual/2025/loc/san-diego/poster/115579 

[28] A. Ajay, Y. Du, A. Gupta, J. Tenenbaum, T. Jaakkola, P. Agrawal, Is conditional generative modeling all you need for decision-making? (2023). arXiv:2211.15657 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15657 

[29] C. Chen, F. Deng, K. Kawaguchi, C. Gulcehre, S. Ahn, Simple hierarchical planning with diffusion (2024). arXiv:2401.02644 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02644 

[30] A. Mouri Zadeh Khaki, A. Choi, Evaluating fairness in llm negotiator agents via economic games using multi-agent systems, Mathematics 14 (3) (2026) 458. doi:10.3390/math14030458 .URL https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030458 

[31] Y. Wang, Game-theoretic understandings of multi-agent systems with multiple objectives (2025). 

arXiv:2509.23026 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23026 

[32] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. de Vries, V. Dumoulin, A. Courville, Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer, in: Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2018. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1709.07871 .[33] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2019, 2019. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1711.05101 .[34] T. N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks (2017). 

arXiv:1609.02907 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 

[35] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach (2019). arXiv:1907.11692 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692 

36