Title: Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07271v1

Published Time: Mon, 10 Aug 2026 00:59:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
Volume xx (20yy ), Number z, pp. 1–12 

# Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 

M. Heitor 1, J. Moreira 1,2 , and D. Gonçalves 1,2

> 1

Instituto Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon, Av. Rovisco Pais 1, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal 

> 2

INESC-ID, R. Alves Redol 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal 

Abstract 

In today’s fast-paced world, delivering information efficiently and unobtrusively is essential. While ambient and glanceable visualizations provide real-time data, they can increase cognitive load and disrupt primary tasks. We investigate incidental vi-sualizations (IVs), a novel concept in information visualization designed to present contextually relevant information briefly and spontaneously, with minimal user interaction. Augmented Reality (AR) offers an ideal medium for this integration, embedding visualizations directly within the user’s environment. Through controlled user studies on logic-based game tasks (Sudoku and Connect 4), this work compares ambient, periodic, and incidental visualization patterns in terms of comprehension accuracy, performance, and disruption. Results indicate that IVs deliver information as effectively as ambient displays while minimizing disruption, highlighting their potential for adaptive, context-aware information delivery in AR environments. 

CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Mixed / augmented reality; User studies; Empirical studies in visualization; 

1. Introduction 

In our fast-paced world, information is everywhere, constantly sur-rounding us both physically and digitally. Therefore, we need ac-cessible ways to interpret it without becoming overwhelmed. Pi-oneered by Mark Weiser in the 1990s [Wei93], the movement of Ubiquitous Computing envisioned technology fading into the back-ground, blending seamlessly into everyday life. The philosophy of Calm Technology [WB15] suggests computing would be effective, invisible, and informative without seizing our focus. Following this ideal to fully integrate these high amounts of information, we need a way to convey data without demanding the user’s full attention. However, the current methods differ in their approach and purpose. Different approaches have emerged, namely ambient visualiza-tions [WID ∗98], which persistently exist embedded within the en-vironment (e.g., airport dashboards). Another approach is glance-able visualizations [BBC ∗21], crafted to be perceived within brief exposure times (e.g., smartwatch charts). The embedded nature of these approaches, along with their need for deep spatial integration, highlights AR as a promising medium for these visualizations [LB21, DMM21, DLB20, PPE ∗21, IFN23]. AR integrates virtual placement of information within the environ-ment, with no extra physical hardware for each visualization. Under a recent surge of development, previous processing lim-itations [LB21, Poh24, KSS22] have been surpassed, making AR increasingly viable for everyday use [LB21, DLB22]. However, this now also allows for the ability to show unrestricted amounts of information, which can quickly lead to occlusion and visual clutter [DLB20]. Despite their convenience, glanceable and ambient visualiza-tions can introduce challenges by diverting attention from primary tasks. They often require users to shift their focus to receive the information, acting as an on-demand mechanism and interrupting ongoing activities to perceive or interact with the visualizations. This can be problematic in situations such as driving or operating heavy machinery, where users cannot afford to spend too much time analyzing information or searching for the necessary details. IVs [MMG20] offer an alternative to the previous settings, appearing automatically during a single glance and only when deemed relevant for the task at hand, without requiring any user input or request [MMG23, MMG24a]. They appear during main tasks, as users expect to get relevant information when needed, with minimal disruption. IVs uniquely combine brief, contextually situ-ated visualizations that appear directly in the user’s field of view, minimizing occlusion, avoiding interaction, and reducing disrup-tion to the primary task. This balance of contextual relevance and unobtrusiveness positions IVs as candidates for AR applications. While Moreira et al.’s founding work on IVs [MMG20,MMG23, MMG24a, MMG24b, MPMG24] sets initial design guidelines and establishes a strong foundation, a comprehensive design framework remains absent, potentially influenced by the current lack of defined everyday applications. Moreover, this field is still in its early stages,    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). arXiv:2608.07271v1 [cs.HC] 7 Aug 2026 2 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information

requiring further research to establish clear implementation guide-lines and use-case scenarios to fully realize their potential utility. This work contributes to the development of incidental visual-izations by further testing and extending the design guidelines pro-posed by Moreira et al. Through a controlled AR-based user study over distinct tasks (Sudoku and Connect Four), it evaluates how IVs compare to ambient, periodic, and no visualization conditions in terms of comprehension, disruption, and task performance. The study provides evidence on whether brief, contextually triggered cues can serve as a viable alternative to other visualization philoso-phies, supporting informativeness while minimizing attention load and visual clutter. Additionally, by integrating task-specific visual-ization design and world-fixed AR placement, the work offers in-sights that inform the development of a broader design framework for IVs and their applicability across diverse real-world scenarios. 

2. Related Work 

AR overlays digital information onto the physical world, enhancing real-world experiences [MMA ∗22] and preserving links between data and physical referents, forming the basis for Situated Visual-izations (SVs) [KSS22]. SVs integrate data with the environment and physical referents [WJD17], providing contextually relevant insights to support understanding, allowing users to focus on pri-mary tasks [MMA ∗22,KKF ∗21]. Their conceptual model connects source to representation, encompassing spatial, temporal, and so-cial situatedness [BKT ∗22, KKF ∗21]. Among visualization types, panels are the most common AR visualization pattern, with mirror and morph variants used less frequently [LSS24]. Empirical studies [LB21, JR21] show that SVs in AR reduce cognitive load and enhance real-time decision-making by re-moving the need to map between digital and physical referents [MMA ∗22, MSA ∗19, BKT ∗22]. Yet, despite challenges like oc-clusion and overload still persisting, which limit their effective-ness [KKF ∗21, EBC ∗21], SVs remain a promising foundation for immersive analytics in AR, enabling users to interpret and act on information directly within their physical context. 

2.1. Ambient Visualizations 

The philosophy of Calm Technology [WB15] envisions technolo-gies that shift information between the periphery and the cen-ter of attention. Rooted in Weiser’s earlier concept of ubiqui-tous computing [Wei93], the idea is that pervasive computing sys-tems should enhance, not interrupt, human experience. Derived from these ideas, peripheral visualizations communicate informa-tion with minimal disruption, evolving into ambient visualizations that embed data into the physical environment using subtle cues such as light, color, or motion [WID ∗98, MMG23]. These visu-alizations are continuously available and aim to provide informa-tion naturally, without requiring focused attention, through subtle awareness [BBC ∗21]. Therefore, ambient visualizations excel when continuous moni-toring is necessary, allowing users to remain aware while engaged in other activities. They are typically non-intrusive and abstract, with aesthetics often serving as a key design feature [BKT ∗22]. Despite their non-intrusive intent, they can still contribute to occlu-sion and visual overload, potentially distracting users from primary tasks. As they focus on persistent availability rather than context-driven temporal visualizations, cognitive load presents as an emerg-ing issue. This availability of information introduces the potential of layering unrestricted digital information from multiple visual-ization sources, increasing cognitive load [MMG23]. 

2.2. Glanceable Visualizations 

While ambient visualizations focus on persistent availability, as technology shifted toward mobile and wearable devices, glance-able visualizations emerged with the aim of reducing obtrusiveness [LB21], prioritizing the focus on the real world where information can be quickly accessed through a glance at these devices. They al-low users to retrieve relevant data at a glance with little focus break from the physical world. In AR, glanceable visualizations overlay content directly within the user’s view, enabling efficient interac-tions that enhance everyday task performance [DLB22, LDB21]. Glanceable AR systems require lightweight, rapid activation methods that avoid visual clutter and occlusion [DLB20, LDB21] and techniques such as visual tokens [PPE ∗21] and automatic-translucency policies [DLB20] which prioritize real-world visibil-ity. Interaction mechanisms range from gaze triggers to hand ges-tures, though challenges such as the Midas Touch Problem and user fatigue remain [LDB21, IFN23]. To mitigate occlusion and cog-nitive load, some systems exploit temporal situatedness, brief vi-sualizations of information that can be perceived pre-attentively [LB21, MMG20]. These low-interference visualizations convey data efficiently, aligning with the goals of IV in AR, to support perception without interrupting primary tasks. 

2.3. Incidental Visualizations 

Incidental visualizations (IVs), introduced by Moreira [MMG24a], deliver timely, context-triggered information that supports users’ ongoing tasks without requiring interaction or diverting attention. Unlike glanceable visualizations, seen on smartwatches or AR sys-tems [LB21, MMG23], which demand explicit user action, IVs ap-pear automatically based on contextual cues, such as environment or task state [DLB22, EBC ∗21]. IVs combine principles from situated, ambient, and glanceable visualizations, emphasizing temporal relevance, minimal cognitive load, and seamless real-world integration [MSA ∗19, MMG24b]. Moreira et al.’s founding work on IVs sets initial design guide-lines, proving their effectiveness and usability during primary tasks [MMG23, MMG24b], setting perception range limitations [MMG20], proposing placement and presentation specifications [MMG24a] and comparing their effectiveness next to the estab-lished ambient visualizations [MPMG24]. These studies strongly suggested that users can perceive short, low-complexity data bursts effectively [MMG20] and maintain task performance while gaining incidental awareness [MMG23,MMG24b]. Comparative work con-firmed IVs’ suitability for focus-intensive activities where continu-ous visualizations would cause distraction or clutter [MPMG24]. Through automated, context-driven activation and short expo-   

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 3 of 12

sure times, IVs minimize occlusion and interaction demands, po-sitioning them as a natural evolution of glanceable visualizations and a promising approach for AR applications. 

2.4. Discussion 

The integration of AR into everyday environments [MMA ∗22, LDB21] offers new opportunities to fit tasks that require seam-less information delivery. Existing paradigms, such as ambient and glanceable visualizations, provide peripheral awareness and rapid data access but are prone to cognitive overload, occlusion, and de-mands on attention or interaction [GBF ∗20, BI21, DLB20]. IVs differ by appearing contextually and briefly, requiring no interac-tion and causing minimal cognitive disruption [MMG20, MMG23, MMG24a], making them well-suited to specific scenarios where the lack of these characteristics is detrimental, and particularly for AR. However, empirical research on IVs remains scarce, with open questions regarding timing, placement, and real-world applicabil-ity [MMG24b, MPMG24]. This study investigates IVs in AR, aim-ing to explore AR as a potential tool to support this information de-livery and settings that balance informativeness with minimal dis-ruption, ensuring they enhance user performance without adding cognitive burden. 

3. Methodology 

The objective of this work was to evaluate the effectiveness of IVs in supporting real-world tasks within AR. Two logic-based games, Sudoku and Connect Four, were used in a within-subjects study comparing IVs and validating their effectiveness against other differing patterns, which represent distinct philosophies of attention. Each scenario measured comprehension accuracy, task performance, and disruption levels, with the goal of testing design guidelines for future AR applications of IVs. We compared IVs against ambient visualizations, an established static pattern recognized for reliably retrieving information through persistent visualizations, despite being prone to disruption chal-lenges inherent in its continuous, embedded presence. To assess the impact of timeliness in IV, we included a periodic display con-dition, where the visualizations are triggered at regularly set inter-vals, ignoring context relevance. Finally, we also considered a None condition, which presented no visualizations, as a control condition to allow for the test of task suitability and information gain as well as a baseline. 

3.1. Research Questions and Hypothesis 

Our research questions and hypotheses fell under the scope of three different categories: comprehension accuracy, primary task disrup-tion, and task performance. A summary is presented in Table 1. 

3.1.1. Comprehension Accuracy 

Comprehension accuracy, a central metric in InfoVis, measures how effectively users extract and interpret data from visual rep-resentations [MMG20, CM84]. It reflects both perceptual clarity and cognitive efficiency, often studied alongside response time and cognitive load to evaluate visualization performance. In time-constrained or attention-limited scenarios, accuracy depends on how well information is conveyed within short exposure times and minimal user interaction [BI21, MMG23]. This motivated our first research question. 

RQ1: How do different visualization types (none, ambient, peri-odic, and incidental) influence comprehension accuracy? 

This metric was evaluated through the acquisition of informa-tion that was implicitly generated by the main task. This derived information regarding the current game state was explicitly repre-sented in the visualizations, enabling immediate assessment of data comprehension, regardless of the user’s performance in the primary activity. The implicit nature meant that although the main task was the focus, the information needed for the accuracy metric was a complementary insight derived from the main task’s progression. Timed visualization approaches, including incidental visualiza-tions, have shown promise for delivering relevant cues without dis-rupting primary tasks [CW87, MMG24a]. Therefore, accuracy dif-ferences can be explored regarding contextually timed visualiza-tions, when deemed relevant for the task, which are expected to contribute to better information acquisition compared to visualiza-tions with non-dynamic preset timings and a periodic pattern. In contrast, always-on ambient visualizations may increase distraction or cognitive overload due to their continuous presence [DLB22]. We expected the effectiveness of having visualizations in rela-tion to the accuracy task to perform better than no visualization, as any kind of visualization yields more accurate results than the lack thereof. Integrating these visualization types into AR allowed for context-sensitive and adaptive information delivery, potentially mitigating occlusion and supporting comprehension in dynamic en-vironments [PPE ∗21, LB21]. These considerations supported the definition of the following hypotheses. 

H1: Ambient, incidental, and periodic visualizations improve comprehension accuracy compared to no visualizations. 

H2: Incidental visualizations provide higher comprehension ac-curacy than periodic visualizations by delivering information at contextually relevant moments. 

H3: Incidental visualizations provide comprehension accuracy close to that of ambient visualizations, despite being temporarily situated. 

3.1.2. Primary Task Disruption 

Disruption testing examines how visualizations affect user atten-tion, task performance, and cognitive load [MMG20]. In AR, where virtual information overlays the physical environment, visualiza-tions may compete with real-world stimuli, amplifying attention demands [PPE ∗21]. To assess disruption, participants provided subjective ratings using the unweighted NASA-TLX [HS88] and a Likert-scale question measuring perceived workload and subjec-tive disruption. These qualitative measures captured how secondary visualizations influenced focus on the primary task and comprehen-sion results. This motivated our second question. 

RQ2: How do different visualization types (none, ambient, pe-riodic, and incidental) affect disruption levels during decision-making tasks?    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). 4 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information

Prior findings suggest that the absence of visualizations min-imizes distraction, while well-designed IVs can integrate seam-lessly into user workflows with minimal interference [MMG23, MMG24b]. Periodic and ambient visualizations, though informa-tive, may increase cognitive demand through repetition or constant visibility [DLB22]. Integrating these visualization types into AR provided insight into balancing awareness and focus. These con-siderations led to the following hypotheses. 

H4: Displaying no visualizations results in the lowest disruption levels, compared to the presence of visualizations (ambient, peri-odic, incidental). 

H5: Incidental visualizations reduce disruption compared to pe-riodic and ambient visualizations by minimizing time looking away from the primary task. 

3.1.3. Task Performance 

Task performance reflects how effectively users complete their pri-mary activity while supported by additional but non-crucial vi-sualizations [MMG23]. The goal of IVs is to assist without de-grading performance, offering relevant cues that enhance decision-making or situational awareness when needed. In AR, these cues can improve efficiency by embedding complementary information directly in context [PPE ∗21, MMG23]. This led to our third re-search question. 

RQ3: How do different visualization types (none, ambient, peri-odic, and incidental) affect task performance? 

Performance measures were only compared within each partici-pant to account for individual skill differences, isolating visualiza-tion effects. We expected visualization-assisted conditions to per-form on par with, or better than, the baseline (no visualization), pro-vided perception and usability of the additional information. Ambi-ent visualizations could offer limited benefit due to static or repet-itive content, while incidental ones were hypothesized to outper-form by delivering timely, relevant information aligned with task context [MMG23, MMG24b, DLB22]. These considerations led to the following hypotheses. 

H6: Ambient, incidental, and periodic visualizations maintain primary task performance on par with no visualization. 

H7: Incidental visualizations outperform other patterns in task performance by supporting with contextually relevant information without unnecessary distraction. 

3.2. Primary Tasks 

IVs work on the assumption that the user is familiar with these visual cues and understands that they can provide additional infor-mation at any moment, not disrupting the primary task [MMG24b]. This means that we assume such visualizations would already be part of people’s natural flow in everyday activities. Therefore, to simulate this real-world interaction, we needed a main task that felt intuitive, something engaging yet familiar. Games are commonly used in AR research [KSS22,DMM21,Poh24] to simulate everyday activities. They support both virtual and physical interaction. Ad-ditionally, game tasks provide measurable outcomes, giving both ecological validity and control. Table 1: Summary of Research Questions and Hypotheses 

RQ H Description 

RQ1 H1 Ambient, incidental, periodic > none visualiza-tions. H2 Incidental > periodic, due to contextual rele-vance. H3 Incidental ≈ ambient, despite temporary. RQ2 H4 No visualization < incidental, periodic, ambi-ent. H5 Incidental < periodic, ambient in time diver-sion. RQ3 H6 Incidental, ambient, periodic ≈ none, not dis-rupting primary task. H7 Incidental > ambient, periodic, none, by sup-porting relevant decisions. To evaluate IVs under familiar and low-learning conditions while covering both individual and shared settings, two common logic-based games were selected: Sudoku (single-player) and Connect Four (multiplayer). Connect Four is a dynamic, dual-player envi-ronment where attention shifts between players and moves and is closer to real-world, collaborative settings. Although it is a mul-tiplayer environment, a computer agent was used as the opponent strategy that the moderator followed in the Connect Four task to ensure scientific control, consistency, and a balanced level of chal-lenge for the participants. Matilde acted as a physical proxy for the agent. In contrast, Sudoku is a single-player-focused activity where attention stays on one area. This combination allowed controlled testing across different at-tention demands and social contexts, aligning with prior studies on glanceable and context-aware AR visualizations [DLB22, IFN23]. Sudoku involves filling a 9×9 grid so that each row, column, and sub-grid contains digits 1–9, emphasizing focused, individual rea-soning. Connect Four requires two players to alternately drop col-ored discs in a vertical grid to connect four in a row, introducing dynamic attention shifts and co-presence effects. Both are simple yet popular games that provided data that could be transformed into supplementary information about the game’s evolving state. This additional information was displayed as visu-alizations that dynamically portrayed the current state of the game, monitoring specific metrics in real time. For the Sudoku task, the additional game information corresponded to the percentage of cor-rectly filled cells. Then, for the Connect Four task, the information corresponded to the number of possibilities a player had to create a sequence of one, two, three, or four pieces in a row. 

3.3. Information Visualization Task 

In addition to gameplay, a secondary perception task was integrated to measure users’ accuracy in interpreting the visualizations within the AR environment. This assessed perceptual comprehension of supplementary information during both games, ensuring the evalu-ation of information extraction alongside task performance.    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 5 of 12

The bar chart visualization had its origin in Moreira’s prior ex-perimental setup [MMG23,MMG24b], where each bar represented how many sets of connected pieces of length one (single pieces) up to four (sequences that are four-piece long) can be formed with all the player’s possible next moves. This supported rapid value comparison through length encoding, a highly accurate perceptual channel [CM84]. For the Sudoku task, while the encoded values were also quan-tized into four categories, a bar chart was less suited. The data represented the percentage of correct cell entries within each grid quadrant. Therefore, a heatmap directly mapped data to the Sudoku grid, reducing cognitive mapping effort and facilitating spatial rea-soning. Although prior work showed that green hues provide higher perceptual discrimination [VCH20], AR visualizations can limit color fidelity. Therefore, the percentage was represented through linear greyscale, chosen for robustness under varying AR lighting conditions [VCH20]. Both visualizations employed pre-attentive processing and subitizing principles [MMG23, MMG24b], limiting elements to four, staying within the subitizing range, to enable rapid, uncon-scious perception of extrema (e.g., highest bar or darkest cell). However, the ease of identifying each maximum could be influ-enced by the perceptual difference between the highest and second-highest values. When these values are close, asking which is higher, for example, could become ambiguous, approaching the threshold of the just-noticeable difference. To account for this, an ambiguity factor was introduced, quantifying the relative difference between values and providing an objective measure of task difficulty inde-pendent of participant performance. This metric not only explains variations within highly accurate channels, such as bar length, but is also critical when analyzing weaker encodings, such as color lu-minance for the heatmap visualizations, where performance is in-herently less precise. More details on this factor in the next section. 

3.4. User Study 

Each game context also supported a secondary task to evaluate the perception of additional information related to the game. In both game contexts, this task consisted of an extremum identification task (“Find Extremum”), selecting the maximum value in each vi-sualization. This allowed us to validate if people were able to under-stand the information conveyed via the several visualization modes. For Connect Four, participants were required to identify the con-nected piece length for which more combinations were possible in the player’s next move. All valid plays were computed per board state, and the tallest bar in the bar chart encoded the corresponding maximum value (Fig. 1). For Sudoku, the maximum corresponded to the most completed quadrant, calculated as the percentage of filled cells relative to its initial empty cells, with shared central cells contributing to adjacent quadrants. This value was visualized as the darkest region in the heatmap (Fig. 2). The secondary perception task was dynamically triggered when a relevant point in the games was reached: 25% of the board com-pleted in Sudoku and a new maximum possible piece-length se-

Figure 1: Example of a Connect Four board and the corresponding barchart visualization. quence in Connect 4. By triggering the secondary task in these mo-ments, we were able to evaluate whether contextual timing resulted in higher comprehension accuracy or lower disruption compared to other patterns. To reduce sensory interference, prompts were delivered via text-to-speech audio, and responses were input using a physical numpad mapped spatially to the visualization layout (four keys for bar charts; 2x2 for heatmaps). Response time and accuracy were logged for each trial. Additionally, an ambiguity factor quantified the rela-tive difference between the two most prominent values: AF Connect Four = |v1 − v2|

7 , AF Sudoku = |v1 − v2|

100 .

The ambiguity factor captured the limits of pre-attentive percep-tion by quantifying how distinct the two highest values were. Pre-attentive processing is most effective when value differences are clear. However, when values are numerically close, distinguishing the maximum becomes perceptually difficult. In such cases, the dif-ference may fall below the just-noticeable difference threshold, re-ducing accuracy even with correct task execution. This factor was applied in cases of near-equal alternatives (similarity > 75%) to dis-tinguish genuine performance errors from perceptual limits. The Meta Quest 3 headset was set in pass-through AR mode for stereoscopic rendering and integrated tracking, with built-in audio 

Figure 2: Example of a semi-completed Sudoku board and the cor-responding heatmap visualization.    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). 6 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information
> (a) Placement of the barchart visualization.
> (b) Placement of the heatmap visualization.

Figure 3: Placement of the visualizations used in the study: the bar-chart (left) and the heatmap (right). delivering task prompts. Selected sessions were recorded using the headset’s built-in video capture for validation and analysis. Following established design guidelines for AR interfaces [LSS24, IML20, PPE ∗21], the visualizations were presented in a world-fixed AR panel positioned near the game board, in the bottom-right corner of the user’s field of view. This placement avoided occlusion of the primary task and ensured proximity to the task space while minimizing occlusion and maintaining peripheral visibility. The panel was aligned perpendicular to the user’s point of view, ensuring comfortable readability while supporting quick glance-based access, as recommended in prior work on interface positioning and task-switching efficiency [IML20]. An example of the visualization placement used in the study is shown in Figure 3. 

3.4.1. Study Variables 

Our study had three dependent variables. Comprehension accu-racy measured participants’ ability to correctly retrieve informa-tion from visualizations, independent of primary task performance. For Connect Four, this entailed selecting the highest bar in the bar chart; for Sudoku, identifying the heatmap region with the high-est intensity. Accuracy was complemented by response time and an ambiguity factor, which accounted for reduced pre-attentive pro-cessing when the two highest values were close. Disruption level 

captured how much the visualization interrupted the primary task, assessed via a 5-point Likert scale and supplemented by mental workload using an unweighted NASA-TLX questionnaire [HS88]. Finally, task performance evaluated the impact of visualizations on the main task, using game-specific metrics: for Connect Four, outcomes (win/loss) combined with duration (quicker victories and slower losses indicate better performance); for Sudoku, normalized final completion percentage. The single within-subject independent variable was visualiza-tion type , with four visualization patterns differing in frequency and timing. 

3.4.2. Participants 

Participants were limited to young adults (20 male, 10 female) aged 18–24 years with engineering backgrounds to ensure a homoge-neous group. Gender diversity was considered within volunteer possibilities to ensure broader representation. Sixty percent reported prior expo-sure to AR, while 27% had none and 13% were unsure. Self-rated familiarity on a 1–5 scale decreased from VR ( M = 3.0, SD = 0.96) to AR headsets ( M = 2.0, SD = 1.07) and interaction design/human computer interaction ( M = 1.0, SD = 1.08), indicating moderate technological familiarity but limited design expertise. All partici-pants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, with the setup ac-commodating glasses and contact lenses. Participation was volun-tary, and informed consent was obtained in accordance with insti-tutional ethics guidelines. 

3.4.3. Study Procedure 

The study was conducted in person with 30 participants in a con-trolled laboratory environment, structured into three main phases: an initial screening phase, a preliminary testing phase, and a subse-quent experimental phase. In the screening phase, participants completed a background questionnaire gathering demographic information as well as prior exposure to AR-related technologies. The first page of the ques-tionnaire also explained data logging and optional video recording of headset views for analysis. Written consent was obtained from all participants, preventing non-consensual data collection. Because IVs are intended to familiarly blend into daily life [MMG24b, MMG23], yet participants are unlikely to have prior experience with these visualizations, a preliminary phase was re-quired to ensure participants could correctly understand the visual-izations and the information therein. To that end, participants received a brief overview in the pre-liminary phase outlining the study’s objectives and structure, in-troducing the two visualizations (bar chart and heatmap) through printed examples. To ensure correct interpretation, they were asked to identify the higher value in each visualization type. Participants then set up the Meta Quest 3 headset and a disposable sweat guard to ensure hygiene and comfort. Then, they performed two warm-up sessions as trial runs of each task before the main experiments, al-lowing users to familiarize themselves with gameplay and the AR interaction. During these warm-ups, the visualization was shown in ambient mode to familiarize participants with the information    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 7 of 12

layout. Participants could repeat warm-ups until they felt confident with the interaction and task flow. The testing phase began with each participant completing four iterations of each of the two primary tasks (Sudoku and Connect Four) for each AR visualization pattern (Ambient, Incidental, Peri-odic, and None). The order of tasks, visualization conditions, and equivalent Sudoku boards were counterbalanced across participants using a Latin Square design to reduce order and learning effects. The Sudokus were presented using A5 paper puzzles, while the Connect Four was played on a physical wooden board with red and blue game pieces (Figure 3). 

3.5. Software Implementation 

Custom Python programs managed both game tasks, automated visualization rendering, event logging, and communication with Unity running on the Meta Quest headset. Logging captured all game states, participant moves, visualization triggers, and re-sponses with timestamps in structured CSV files. Digital question-naires (background, post-trial, post-study) were delivered to partic-ipants via Google Forms. 

3.5.0.1. Connect Four The 6×7 board was implemented in Python using pygame , and was represented with NumPy arrays. The computer opponent used a Minimax algorithm with Alpha-Beta pruning (depth 3) [Jus23], with a 40% random-move prob-ability after the first five turns to simulate human-like variability. This computer agent acted as a "standardized opponent," ensuring that every participant faced the same level of strategic difficulty while still experiencing the unpredictability of a real-world game. The system handled move validation, win detection, turn alterna-tion, visualization triggers, and automatic logging of all actions, responses, and outcomes. 

3.5.0.2. Sudoku The sudoku game was implemented in Python with a Flask (v3.1.0) backend, and its grids were divided into four quadrants, tracking initial, updated, and completed states. The four puzzles (plus trial) were of medium difficulty (38 clues, unique so-lution) and generated through equivalence transformations to main-tain difficulty across iterations. The system managed visualization triggers, secondary task timing, and logged all participant interac-tions automatically. Each iteration was limited to 4 minutes, allow-ing sufficient opportunities to trigger the secondary accuracy task at each 25% quadrant completion and prevent participant fatigue. 

4. Results 

The following section presents the experimental results across all dependent variables. Data was screened for outliers, and all extreme outliers (points beyond 3 × IQR ) were removed. How-ever, we kept them in the boxplots (shown below) to give the original overview. Data was generally not normally distributed, as assessed by Shapiro–Wilk’s test ( p < . 05). Therefore, non-parametric Friedman tests were used on all dependent variables with variance to determine statistically significant differences with Bonferroni-corrected post hoc pairwise comparisons when appro-priate [Lae15], as an alternative to the one-way repeated measures     

> (a) Connect Four Accuracy with Ambiguity Measure
> (b) Sudoku Accuracy with Ambigu-ity Measure

Figure 4: Accuracy scores with the ambiguity measure across visu-alization conditions for Connect Four and Sudoku tasks. ANOVA. Groups with zero variance were excluded from testing, as they could not be meaningfully compared in non-parametric tests. All analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics (SPSS Statistics, 2012). Each subsection presents the statistics, boxplot visualizations, and a final summary of significant differences 2. 

4.1. Accuracy 

The following analyses examine accuracy in the secondary task across the four visualization conditions for both tasks. 

4.1.1. Accuracy with Ambiguity Measure 

This subsection presents the accuracy results incorporating the am-biguity factor for cases where the visualization values were closely similar and distinguishing between clearly perceivable and ambigu-ous visualization conditions. 

4.1.1.1. Connect Four All ambient, incidental, and periodic modes presented no within-group variance and were excluded from the statistical test. Because comparing a group with variance to one without will always yield statistically significant results, we concluded there were significant differences between None and all other modes. The distribution of accuracy scores for this task, across visualization conditions, is shown in Figure 4a. 

4.1.1.2. Sudoku In Sudoku, the ambient and periodic modes had no variance after outlier removal. The Friedman test was conducted on the two remaining groups, with a significant difference between incidental ( Mdn = 1.00 , Avg = .964) and None ( Mdn = 1.00 , Avg =

0.869) ( p = .0025). All pairwise comparisons between the groups with and without variance were also deemed significant, between ambient and periodic and between both incidental and periodic. The distribution of accuracy scores for this task and across visu-alization conditions is shown in Figure 4. 

4.1.2. Accuracy with Time Measure 

This subsection presents the accuracy results weighted by response time, reflecting efficiency in interpreting visual information, where faster, correct responses indicate stronger perceptual understand-ing, and slower, incorrect responses indicate higher difficulty or uncertainty. For this dataset, the minimum and maximum values            

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). 8 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information
> (a) Connect Four Accuracy with Time Measure
> (b) Sudoku Accuracy with Time Measure

Figure 5: Accuracy scores with the time measure across visualiza-tion conditions for Connect Four and Sudoku tasks. used for score normalization were considered the second lowest and second highest values. The first were considered outliers (.000 seconds and over 78 seconds due to misclicks) and not included in the scores. 

4.1.2.1. Connect Four The accuracy scores were statistically sig-nificantly different for the visualization modes χ2(2) = 38 .880 , p <.001. Post hoc analysis revealed statistically significant differences between None ( Mdn = 0.736) and all other patterns, with ambient (Mdn = 0.953) ( p < . 001), incidental ( Mdn = 0.937) ( p = .002) and periodic ( Mdn = 0.910) ( p = .016). The only other significant increase was found between ambient ( Mdn = 0.953) and periodic (Mdn = 0.910) ( p = .008). The distribution of accuracy scores for this task and across visualization conditions is shown in Figure 5b. 

4.1.2.2. Sudoku The accuracy scores were statistically signifi-cantly different for the visualization modes χ2(2) = 30 .840 , p <.001. Post hoc analysis revealed statistically significant differences between None ( Mdn = .601) and incidental ( Mdn = .836) ( p =

.001), also between None ( Mdn = .601) and ambient ( Mdn = .886) (p < . 001). Furthermore, there was also a significant decrease from ambient ( Mdn = .886) to periodic ( Mdn = .763) ( p < . 001). The distribution of accuracy scores for this task and across visualization conditions is shown in Figure 5. 

4.2. Primary Task Disruption 

This section examines the impact of different visualization modes on participants’ experience during the primary task, considering both perceived disruption and mental workload. The None condi-tion displayed no variance for both tasks and was excluded from statistical testing, considering all pairwise comparisons between None and the other modes significant. 

4.2.1. Perceived Disruption 

First, we present the results for perceived disruption. 

4.2.1.1. Connect Four Between the remaining conditions (am-bient, incidental, and periodic), the Friedman test revealed signif-icant differences ( p < . 001). Post hoc analysis showed lower per-ceived disruption for ambient ( Mdn = 0.953) compared to both pe-riodic ( Mdn = 0.910) ( p < . 001) and incidental ( Mdn = 0.937)  

> (a) Connect Four Disruption (b) Sudoku Disruption

Figure 6: Disruption levels (Likert scale) across visualization modes for both tasks. (p = .003). Figure 6a presents the results of the disruption measure for this task across the visualization conditions. 

4.2.1.2. Sudoku The accuracy scores were statistically signifi-cantly different for the visualization modes χ2(2) = 34 .865 , p <.001. Post hoc analysis revealed statistically significant differ-ences between ambient ( Mdn = .886) and incidental ( Mdn = .836) (p = .001) and also between ambient and periodic ( Mdn = .763) (p < . 001). Furthermore, there was also a significant increase from incidental to periodic ( p < . 001). Figure 6b presents the results of disruption for this task across the visualization conditions. 

4.2.2. Perceived Workload 

Now, we present the results for perceived workload using the NASA-TLX. 

4.2.2.1. Connect Four The resulting NASA-TLX workload scores were statistically significantly different at the different time points during participantion ( χ2(2) = 28 .252 , p < . 001). Post hoc analysis revealed statistically significant differences in workload scores from ambient ( Mdn = 2.667) to periodic ( Mdn = 6.833) (p = .031), ambient to None ( Mdn = 7.917) ( p < . 001) and in-cidental ( Mdn = 5.000) ( p = .003) to None, but not incidental to ambient, incidental to periodic, or periodic to None. The distribu-tion of NASA-TLX workload evaluation results across visualiza-tion conditions is shown in Figure 7a. 

4.2.2.2. Sudoku The resulting NASA-TLX workload scores were statistically significantly different at the different time points dur-ing the exercise intervention ( χ2(2) = 29 .868 , p < . 001). Post hoc analysis revealed statistically significant differences in workload scores from ambient ( Mdn = 3.833) to periodic ( Mdn = 7.000) (p < . 001), ambient to None ( Mdn = 8.000) ( p < . 001) and in-cidental ( Mdn = 5.750) ( p = .008) to None, but not incidental to ambient, incidental to periodic, or periodic to None. The distribu-tion of NASA-TLX workload evaluation results across visualiza-tion conditions is shown in Figure 7b. 

4.3. Primary Task Performance 

Now we present the results regarding the performance of each of the primary tasks tested.     

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 9 of 12
> (a) Connect Four Workload (b) Sudoku Workload

Figure 7: NASA-TLX mental workload scores across visualization modes for both tasks. 

4.3.0.1. Connect Four The obtained scores were (Mdn =

−0.657) for incidental, ambient ( Mdn = −0.620), None ( Mdn =

−0.598) and periodic ( Mdn = −0.554), but results from the sta-tistical test revealed no significant differences ( χ2(2) = 5.217 , p =

.157). The performance results for Connect Four are presented in Figure 8a. 

4.3.0.2. Sudoku The scores varied from incidental ( Mdn =

0.321), to None ( Mdn = 0.313), to ambient ( Mdn = 0.306) and periodic ( Mdn = 0.300), but the differences were not statistically significant ( χ2(2) = 2.636 , p = .451). The performance results for Sudoku are presented in Figure 8b. Table 2 summarizes all statistically significant pairwise differences found across the analyzed dependent variables. Only comparisons with p < . 05 after Bonferroni correction are reported. No signif-icant effects were observed for performance, and accuracy differ-ences were limited to the Sudoku task. 

4.4. Discussion 

Accuracy results demonstrated a significant improvement from None to all other patterns. However, no additional differences were observed, and all except one were implicit conclusions, likely at-tributable to ceiling effects from the chosen tasks. Time-based ac-curacy revealed significant differences between None and all visu-alization modes in Connect Four, as well as between None and both ambient and incidental modes in Sudoku, indicating faster informa- 

> (a) Connect Four Performance (b) Sudoku Performance

Figure 8: Performance results across visualization modes for both tasks. Table 2: Summary of significant pairwise differences across depen-dent variables                                                                                     

> Dependent Variable Task Comparison Significance
> Accuracy with Ambiguity C4 None vs Amb, Inc, Per implicit †
> SK ambient vs Inc, None implicit †
> SK periodic vs Inc, None implicit †
> SK incidental vs None p=.002 Accuracy with Time C4 None vs ambient p< . 001 C4 None vs incidental p=.002 C4 None vs periodic p=.016 C4 ambient vs periodic p=.008 SK None vs incidental p=.001 SK None vs ambient p< . 001 SK ambient vs periodic p< . 001 Disruption (Likert Scale) C4 None vs Amb, Inc, Per implicit †
> C4 ambient vs incidental p=.003 C4 ambient vs periodic p< . 001 SK None vs Amb, Inc, Per implicit †
> SK ambient vs incidental p=.001 SK ambient vs periodic p< . 001 SK incidental vs periodic p< . 001 Workload (NASA-TLX) C4 ambient vs periodic p=.031 C4 ambient vs None p< . 001 C4 incidental vs None p=.003 SK ambient vs periodic p< . 001 SK ambient vs None p< . 001 SK incidental vs None p=.008 Performance Both –n.s.
> Note. C4 = Connect Four; SK = Sudoku; Amb = ambient; Inc = inci-dental; Per = periodic.
> †Zero-variance groups excluded; any comparison with a group with variance is inherently significant.

tion acquisition with visual support. Thus, H1 is supported . The incidental mode did not outperform periodic ( H2 not supported )but achieved comparable performance to ambient, while periodic did not, in time-based accuracy, suggesting that contextual, tran-sient cues can aid comprehension. Therefore, H3 is supported ,confirming that IVs can be as effective as ambient visualizations. Although None provided the highest workload scores, requiring higher mental demand for the task due to the lack of additional in-formation, as predicted, the absence of visualization (None) caused the least disruption ( H4 is supported ). Ambient visualizations were perceived as the next least intrusive, while periodic and in-cidental modes showed higher disruption. NASA-TLX results con-firmed this trend, with ambient providing the lowest workload and disruption, followed by incidental and then periodic. Although H5 was not supported , incidental and ambient showed similar disrup-tion levels, while the time-based mode differed significantly, further suggesting that context-triggered visualizations are less distracting than time-based ones.    

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026). 10 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information

Visualization modes did not significantly affect primary task out-comes, indicating that added visualizations did not hinder game-play. This supports H6 , showing that IVs and other visualization types do not disrupt task performance. However, H7 was not sup-ported , as the incidental pattern did not outperform other modes but maintained equivalent performance, underscoring its suitability for AR. Although comparing tasks was not a primary aim, their differ-ing cognitive demands produced distinct accuracy and disruption patterns. For ambiguity-based accuracy, Sudoku showed contrasts, with ambient and periodic achieving perfect scores and inciden-tal showing slight variability. The time-weighted measure further highlighted task dependence: periodic failed to outperform None in Sudoku but did so in Connect Four, suggesting that periodic up-dates may interfere more in single-focus intensive tasks. Perceived disruption also diverged, with both tasks rating periodic as more disruptive, but in Sudoku, with a clear advantage for incidental. Workload and primary task performance remained stable across modes. These patterns reveal how task demands can modulate the impact of different visualization strategies. Overall, IVs provided an effective balance between informa-tiveness and non-disruption. Comparable accuracy and workload to ambient visualizations and lower disruption than periodic indi-cate that transient, context-aware cues can enhance comprehension while minimizing interference. This aligns with design principles of “information when relevant,” promoting efficient cognitive in-tegration in AR. The selected visualization idioms proved effec-tive for brief, incidental viewing due to their perceptually accurate encodings and task relevance [CM84, WJD17, QR22]. Participants successfully interpreted visual data even under short exposures, supporting prior work on glanceable visualizations in immersive contexts [MMG20, MMG23, MMG24a, MMG24b]. Importantly, these results indicate that augmented reality is a well-suited medium for incidental visualizations. AR provides spa-tially grounded context for information presentation, while the in-cidental and transient nature of IVs mitigates common AR chal-lenges such as cognitive overload and visual occlusion. Across both analytical (Sudoku) and interactive (Connect Four) tasks, IVs remained robust, maintaining usability and cognitive efficiency. Together, these findings suggest that AR-based incidental visu-alizations can deliver high informational value while preserving user focus, achieving a favorable balance between utility and non-intrusiveness. 

4.5. Limitations and Future Work 

While the sample size limited parametric analysis, 30 partici-pants provided meaningful insights for AR research. Future stud-ies should include larger, more diverse samples, explore long-term use, and assess IVs in other realistic scenarios. Eye-tracking would further clarify attentional effects, gaze behavior, and distraction in response to transient visualizations [PPE ∗21, DLB22]. Investigat-ing alternative visual encodings (e.g., radial or line charts), more complex or collaborative tasks, and covariates such as perceptual speed [LCO20, QR22] would refine understanding of user variabil-ity and cognitive efficiency. Ultimately, IVs show promise as con-textually adaptive visualizations that minimize occlusion and cog-nitive load in dynamic AR environments. By combining adaptivity, relevance, and unobtrusiveness, they support informative yet fluid user experiences in immersive analytics. 

5. Conclusion 

In a world increasingly defined by the coexistence of digital and physical realities, information is no longer confined to screens, flowing through our environments, shaping how we act, decide, and understand. Yet, as this increasing presence expands, so does the challenge to deliver data seamlessly, without overloading attention or interrupting natural interactions. This question lies at the heart of our work, exploring how IVs, as brief, contextually triggered visualizations that appear during on-going real-world activities, can help bridge this gap. Specifically, it aimed to empirically test and validate the applicability of IVs in AR, focusing on their ability to convey information efficiently while maintaining the user’s primary focus through a controlled study comparing four visualization modes (ambient, incidental, pe-riodic, and none) across two AR tasks. The work examined their effects on accuracy, disruption, workload, and performance. Results indicated that visualizations can convey data effec-tively without increasing cognitive load or disrupting task focus. Both Ambient and Incidental modes maintained high task accu-racy and low disruption, outperforming the time-based Periodic mode. Across both single-user and collaborative contexts, partic-ipants maintained high task accuracy while interpreting inciden-tal information. These findings supported the viability of IVs for context-aware, low-attention information delivery, showing that users can integrate secondary visual cues without compromising their performance or attention allocation. While ambient visual-izations achieved the highest accuracy and the lowest perceived disruption, they also carry inherent limitations, most notably oc-clusion of real-world elements, a persistent challenge in AR de-sign [DLB20]. However, the incidental mode matched ambient per-formance while minimizing visual clutter and occlusion, confirm-ing that transient, context-aware cues can deliver information effi-ciently and unobtrusively. These findings demonstrated that visualizations in AR need not dominate attention to be effective. When designed around context, timing, and perceptual simplicity, they can integrate naturally into the user’s workflows, enhancing understanding while preserving focus and awareness. In doing so, our work further positions IVs as a promising paradigm for delivering contextually relevant, glance-able information that harmonizes, rather than competes against, the dynamics of human attention and expanding its application range to AR environments. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was developed within the scope of the UNESCO Chair on AI & VR, and supported by national funds through Fun-dação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, I.P. (FCT) under projects UID/50021/2025 and UID/PRR/50021/2025. The authors used AI for language editing. All content was reviewed and verified by the authors, who take full responsibility for the final manuscript.   

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026).

M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 11 of 12 

References 

[BBC ∗21] BLASCHECK T., BENTLEY F., CHOE E. K., HORAK 

T., ISENBERG P.: Characterizing Glanceable Visualizations: From Perception to Behavior Change. In Mobile Data Vi-sualization . Chapman and Hall/CRC, Nov. 2021, pp. 151–176. URL: https://inria.hal.science/hal-03524091 , doi: 10.1201/9781003090823-5 . 1, 2 [BI21] BLASCHECK T., I SENBERG P.: A replication study on glance-able visualizations: Comparing different stimulus sizes on a laptop com-puter. In Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference on Com-puter Vision, Imaging and Computer Graphics Theory and Applications, VISIGRAPP 2021, Volume 3: IVAPP, Online Streaming, February 8-10, 2021 (2021), Hurter C., Purchase H. C., Braz J., Bouatouch K., (Eds.), SCITEPRESS, pp. 133–143. URL: https://doi.org/10.5220/ 0010328501330143 , doi:10.5220/0010328501330143 . 3 [BKT ∗22] BRESSA N., K ORSGAARD H., T ABARD A., H OUBEN S., VERMEULEN J.: What’s the situation with situated visualization? a sur-vey and perspectives on situatedness. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-tion and Computer Graphics 28 , 1 (2022), 107–117. doi:10.1109/ TVCG.2021.3114835 . 2 [CM84] CLEVELAND W. S., MCGILL R.: Graphical percep-tion: Theory, experimentation, and application to the devel-opment of graphical methods. Journal of the American Sta-tistical Association 79 , 387 (1984), 531–554. URL: https: //www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01621459. 1984.10478080 , arXiv:https://www.tandfonline. com/doi/pdf/10.1080/01621459.1984.10478080 ,

doi:10.1080/01621459.1984.10478080 . 3, 5, 10 [CW87] CARSWELL C. M., W ICKENS C. D.: Information integra-tion and the object display an interaction of task demands and dis-play superiority. Ergonomics 30 , 3 (1987), 511–527. URL: https: //doi.org/10.1080/00140138708969741 , arXiv:https: //doi.org/10.1080/00140138708969741 , doi:10.1080/ 00140138708969741 . 3 [DLB20] DAVARI S., L U F., B OWMAN D. A.: Occlusion management techniques for everyday glanceable AR interfaces. In 2020 IEEE Confer-ence on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops, VR Workshops, Atlanta, GA, USA, March 22-26, 2020 (2020), IEEE, pp. 324–330. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/VRW50115. 2020.00072 , doi:10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00072 . 1, 2, 3, 10 [DLB22] DAVARI S., L U F., B OWMAN D. A.: Validating the bene-fits of glanceable and context-aware augmented reality for everyday in-formation access tasks. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) (2022), pp. 436–444. doi:10.1109/ VR51125.2022.00063 . 1, 2, 3, 4, 10 [DMM21] DASKALOGRIGORAKIS G., M CNAMARA A., M ANIA K.: Holo-box: Level-of-detail glanceable interfaces for augmented reality. In SIGGRAPH 2021: Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference, Posters, Virtual Event, USA, Au-gust 9-13, 2021 (2021), ACM, pp. 13:1–13:2. URL: https://doi. org/10.1145/3450618.3469175 , doi:10.1145/3450618. 3469175 . 1, 4 [EBC ∗21] ENS B., B ACH B., C ORDEIL M., E NGELKE U., S ERRANO 

M., W ILLETT W., P ROUZEAU A., A NTHES C., B ÜSCHEL W., D UNNE 

C., DWYER T., GRUBERT J., HAGA J. H., KIRSHENBAUM N., KOBAYASHI D., L IN T., O LAOSEBIKAN M., P OINTECKER F., S AFFO 

D., S AQUIB N., S CHMALSTIEG D., S ZAFIR D. A., W HITLOCK M., YANG Y.: Grand challenges in immersive analytics. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems (New York, NY, USA, 2021), CHI ’21, Association for Comput-ing Machinery. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764. 3446866 , doi:10.1145/3411764.3446866 . 2 [GBF ∗20] GUARESE R., B ECKER J. A., F ENSTERSEIFER H., W ALTER 

M., F REITAS C., N EDEL L., M ACIEL A.: Augmented situated visual-ization for spatial and context-aware decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (New York, NY, USA, 2020), AVI ’20, Association for Computing Machin-ery. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3399715.3399838 ,

doi:10.1145/3399715.3399838 . 3 [HS88] HART S. G., STAVELAND L. E.: Development of nasa-tlx (task load index): Results of empirical and theoretical re-search. In Human Mental Workload , Hancock P. A., Meshkati N., (Eds.), vol. 52 of Advances in Psychology . North-Holland, 1988, pp. 139–183. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0166411508623869 , doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9 . 3, 6 [IFN23] IQUIAPAZA Y., F ILHO J. A. W., N EDEL L. P.: Dear: Com-bining desktop and augmented reality for visual data analysis. In Pro-ceedings of the 25th Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality, SVR 2023, Rio Grande, Brazil, November 6-9, 2023 (2023), ACM, pp. 233– 237. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3625008.3625021 ,

doi:10.1145/3625008.3625021 . 1, 2, 4 [IML20] IMAMOV S., M ONZEL D., L AGES W. S.: Where to dis-play? how interface position affects comfort and task switching time on glanceable interfaces. In IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces, VR 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA, March 22-26, 2020 (2020), IEEE, pp. 851–858. URL: https: //doi.org/10.1109/VR46266.2020.1581435674325 ,

doi:10.1109/VR46266.2020.1581435674325 . 6 [JR21] JEFFRI N. F., R AMBLI D.: A review of augmented reality systems and their effects on mental workload and task performance. Heliyon 7 

(03 2021), e06277. doi:10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e06277 . 2 [Jus23] JUST A3DO BJECT : Connect four game. https: //github.com/gdsc-ipsacademy/Connect-Four-Game/ blob/main/src/game.py , 2023. MIT License. 7 [KKF ∗21] KRAUS M., K LEIN K., F UCHS J., K EIM D. A., S CHREIBER 

F., S EDLMAIR M.: The value of immersive visualization. IEEE Com-puter Graphics and Applications 41 , 4 (2021), 125–132. doi:10. 1109/MCG.2021.3075258 . 2 [KSS22] KLEIN K., S EDLMAIR M., S CHREIBER F.: Immersive ana-lytics: An overview. it - Information Technology 64 , 4-5 (2022), 155– 168. URL: https://doi.org/10.1515/itit-2022-0037 

[cited 2024-12-28], doi:doi:10.1515/itit-2022-0037 . 1, 2, 4[Lae15] LAERD STATISTICS : Friedman test using spss statistics. 

https://statistics.laerd.com/statistical-guides/ friedman-test-using-spss-statistics.php ,2015. Statistical tutorials and software guides. Retrieved from https://statistics.laerd.com/. 7 [LB21] LU F., BOWMAN D. A.: Evaluating the potential of glanceable AR interfaces for authentic everyday uses. In IEEE Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces, VR 2021, Lisbon, Por-tugal, March 27 - April 1, 2021 (2021), IEEE, pp. 768–777. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/VR50410.2021.00104 ,

doi:10.1109/VR50410.2021.00104 . 1, 2, 3 [LCO20] LIU Z., CROUSER R. J., OTTLEY A.: Survey on in-dividual differences in visualization. Computer Graphics Forum 39 , 3 (2020), 693–712. URL: https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/cgf.14033 , arXiv:https: //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cgf. 14033 , doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.14033 . 10 [LDB21] LU F., D AVARI S., B OWMAN D. A.: Exploration of techniques for rapid activation of glanceable information in head-worn augmented reality. In SUI ’21: Symposium on Spatial User Interaction, Virtual Event, USA, November 9-10, 2021 (2021), Ortega F. R., Teather R. J., Bruder G., Piumsomboon T., Weyers B., Batmaz A. U., Johnsen K., Borst C. W., (Eds.), ACM, pp. 14:1–14:11. URL: https://doi. org/10.1145/3485279.3485286 , doi:10.1145/3485279. 3485286 . 2, 3 [LSS24] LEE B., S EDLMAIR M., S CHMALSTIEG D.: Design patterns   

> submitted to COMPUTER GRAPHICS Forum (8/2026).

12 of 12 M. Heitor, J. Moreira, & D. Gonçalves / Incidental Visualizations: Augmented Reality as a Medium for Contextual Information 

for situated visualization in augmented reality. IEEE Trans. Vis. Com-put. Graph. 30 , 1 (2024), 1324–1335. URL: https://doi.org/ 10.1109/TVCG.2023.3327398 , doi:10.1109/TVCG.2023. 3327398 . 2, 6 [MMA ∗22] MARTINS N. C., M ARQUES B., A LVES J., A RAÚJO T., DIAS P., S ANTOS B. S.: Augmented reality situated visualization in decision-making. Multim. Tools Appl. 81 , 11 (2022), 14749–14772. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-021-10971-4 ,

doi:10.1007/S11042-021-10971-4 . 2, 3 [MMG20] MOREIRA J., M ENDES D., G ONÇALVES D.: Incidental vi-sualizations: Pre-attentive primitive visual tasks. In AVI ’20: Inter-national Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, Island of Ischia, Italy, September 28 - October 2, 2020 (2020), Tortora G., Vitiello G., Winckler M., (Eds.), ACM, pp. 25:1–25:9. URL: https://doi. org/10.1145/3399715.3399841 , doi:10.1145/3399715. 3399841 . 1, 2, 3, 10 [MMG23] MOREIRA J., M ENDES D., G ONÇALVES D.: Impact of incidental visualizations on primary tasks. Information Visualiza-tion 22 , 4 (2023), 307–322. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/ 14738716231180892 , arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/ 14738716231180892 , doi:10.1177/14738716231180892 .1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 [MMG24a] MOREIRA J., M ENDES D., G ONÇALVES D.: Inciden-tal graphical perception: How marks and display time influence accu-racy. Information Visualization 23 , 1 (2024), 3–20. URL: https: //doi.org/10.1177/14738716231189218 , arXiv:https: //doi.org/10.1177/14738716231189218 , doi:10.1177/ 14738716231189218 . 1, 2, 3, 10 [MMG24b] MOREIRA J., MENDES D., GONÇALVES D.: In-cidental visualizations: How complexity factors influence task performance. Visual Informatics 8, 4 (2024), 85–96. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S2468502X24000652 , doi:https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.visinf.2024.10.005 . 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 [MPMG24] MOREIRA J., P INTO D., M ENDES D., G ONÇALVES D.: In-cidental versus ambient visualizations: Comparing cognitive and me-chanical tasks. In 2024 International Conference on Graphics and Inter-action (ICGI) (2024), pp. 1–8. doi:10.1109/ICGI64003.2024. 10923794 . 1, 2, 3 [MSA ∗19] MARQUES B., S ANTOS B. S., A RAUJO T., M ARTINS N. C., ALVES J. B., D IAS P.: Situated visualization in the decision pro-cess through augmented reality. In 2019 23rd International Con-ference Information Visualisation (IV) (July 2019), IEEE, p. 13–18. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IV.2019.00012 , doi: 10.1109/iv.2019.00012 . 2 [Poh24] POHL H.: Body-based augmented reality feedback during con-versations. Proc. ACM Hum. Comput. Interact. 8 , MHCI (2024), 1–22. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3676491 , doi:10.1145/ 3676491 . 1, 4 [PPE ∗21] PIENING R., P FEUFFER K., E STEVES A., M ITTERMEIER 

T., P RANGE S., S CHRÖDER P., A LT F.: Looking for info: Eval-uation of gaze based information retrieval in augmented reality. In 

Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2021 - 18th IFIP TC 13 International Conference, Bari, Italy, August 30 - September 3, 2021, Proceedings, Part I (2021), Ardito C., Lanzilotti R., Malizia A., Petrie H., Piccinno A., Desolda G., Inkpen K., (Eds.), vol. 12932 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Springer, pp. 544–565. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-85623-6_32 ,

doi:10.1007/978-3-030-85623-6\_32 . 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10 [QR22] QUADRI G. J., R OSEN P.: A survey of perception-based visual-ization studies by task. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-puter Graphics 28 , 12 (2022), 5026–5048. doi:10.1109/TVCG. 2021.3098240 . 10 [VCH20] VANDERPLAS S., C OOK D., H OFMANN H.: Testing sta-tistical charts: what makes a good graph? Annual Review of Statis-tics and Its Application 7 (Mar. 2020), 61–88. doi:10.1146/ annurev-statistics-031219-041252 . 5 [WB15] WEISER M., B ROWN J. S.: Das kommende Zeitalter der Calm Technology . transcript Verlag, Sept. 2015, p. 59–72. URL: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.14361/9783839430460-001 ,

doi:10.14361/9783839430460-001 . 1, 2 [Wei93] WEISER M.: Some computer science issues in ubiq-uitous computing. Commun. ACM 36 , 7 (July 1993), 75–84. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/159544.159617 , doi: 10.1145/159544.159617 . 1, 2 [WID ∗98] WISNESKI C., I SHII H., D AHLEY A., G ORBET M. G., BRAVE S., U LLMER B., Y ARIN P.: Ambient displays: Turning architec-tural space into an interface between people and digital information. In 

Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Cooperative Build-ings, Integrating Information, Organization, and Architecture (Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998), CoBuild ’98, Springer-Verlag, p. 22–32. 1, 2 [WJD17] WILLETT W., JANSEN Y., DRAGICEVIC P.: Embedded data representations. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 23 , 1 (2017), 461–470. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016. 2598608 , doi:10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598608 . 2, 10