Title: Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.21239v1

Published Time: Mon, 21 Sep 2026 00:24:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions 

# Anna M. Fang 

Carnegie Mellon University, Human-Computer Interaction Institute Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA annadfang@gmail.com 

# Tony Wang ∗

Cornell University, Department of Information Science Ithaca, New York, USA yw2567@cornell.edu 

# Jenny Fu ∗

Columbia University, Data Science Institute New York, New York, USA xf2318@columbia.edu 

Figure 1: Six Orientations of HCI Interventions for Mental Health & Self-Care, surfaced in our scoping review of 91 SIGCHI papers from 2015 to mid-2026. Papers in external rings account for overlaps that could not be represented spatially. 

## Abstract 

Technology increasingly supports self-care for understanding and improving one’s own mental health. HCI is at the center of the turn towards self-care technology, yet we lack an account of who these interventions serve, what practices they support, how technology mediates those practices, and assumptions underlying design for self-care. In order to characterize the current landscape and inform 

> ∗

Second and third authors contributed equally. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

CHI ’27, Pittsburgh, PA 

© 2027 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

future research, we analyzed 91 SIGCHI papers that contribute HCI interventions for mental health self-care from the ACM Digital Library from 2015 through June 2026. Then, we conducted an in-terpretive synthesis to surface six orientations of self-care , which describe how HCI self-care interventions constitute care through shared assumptions regarding self, care, and technology. Overall, our work provides an interconnected vocabulary for positioning HCI mental health self-care, highlights changing responsibilities of care towards users, and discusses implications for providing a more situated account of HCI self-care technology in addressing the ’general’ user. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and models .arXiv:2609.21239v1 [cs.HC] 18 Sep 2026 CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

## Keywords 

mental health, well-being, self-care, scoping review, literature re-view   

> ACM Reference Format:
> Anna M. Fang, Tony Wang, and Jenny Fu. 2027. Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions. In Proceedings of ACM Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’27). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 26 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

## 1 Introduction 

A longstanding and fundamental part of mental health is self-care –the activities individuals undertake in understanding, maintaining, and improving their own health [73, 105]. Self-care is particularly consequential for mental health given the substantial burden of mental health conditions worldwide; 1.2 billion people live with mental health conditions, while persistent barriers including cost, limited availability, and stigma continue to constrain access to for-mal services [4, 112, 135, 170]. At the same time, mental health is increasingly understood not simply as the presence or absence of disorder, but as a multidimensional and ubiquitous aspect of everyday life [42, 59, 104]. Experiences such as stress, anxiety, lone-liness, and emotion regulation challenges are transdiagnostic and common, preceding or occurring independently of clinical diag-noses [59]. Thus, self-care for mental health has grown as a practice across the spectrum of mental health needs, from everyday cop-ing and well-being to ongoing management of chronic or clinical conditions. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) is at the center of this shift towards self-care as digital technologies are increasingly inter-twined with how people care for their own mental health outside traditional care settings [2, 102]. Over several decades, HCI has developed mobile mental health applications, wearable sensing sys-tems, conversational agents and AI-mediated therapy, and more, which are used independently for self-directed support [10, 159]. Advances in large language models and embodied interaction have only further expanded the design space of HCI for self-care given greater ability for adaptive and personalized interactions [49, 150]. Collectively, this work positions HCI as an active mediator of how people practice self-care. Despite this rich breadth of work, we lack systematic understand-ing of how HCI has conceptualized and designed interventions for self-care and mental health. It remains unclear who and what these interventions commonly address, what forms of self-care activities they support, and what motivates these interventions. These ques-tions are particularly consequential because (HCI) design values become embedded in self-care interventions [139], which often reach people directly, outside clinical settings or supervision, and without evaluation standards expected in other fields regarding therapeutic efficacy. Therefore, comprehensive mapping of these interventions is necessary for shared understanding of the current landscape and which conceptions of self-care are prioritized and enacted. Specifically, we address the following research questions: RQ 1 Who and what mental health needs are addressed by HCI interventions for self-care & mental health? RQ 2 What self-care practices are supported by HCI interven-tions for self-care & mental health? RQ 3 What core contributions do papers frame their interven-tions around in regards to self-care for mental health? We answer these questions through a scoping review of 91 SIGCHI papers on HCI interventions for mental health self-care. Then, grounded in this synthesis, we surface ways that HCI con-ceptualizes self-care through six orientations that map inter-ventions’ shared assumptions of what aspects of the self are to be cared for, how to care for those aspects, and the role technology assumes in supporting that care. We therefore highlight how HCI design has approached the relationship between the self , care , and 

technology .This paper makes two contributions: (1) an overview of HCI interventions for mental health self-care, characterizing target pop-ulations, target mental health topics, and self-care activities, and (2) six orientations of self-care that identify how technologies enact care: by making experience tangible, quantifying the self, training self-care skills, facilitating action, enacting social care, or attending directly to affective experience . Together, these contributions offer a vocabulary for positioning and navigating self-care research in HCI, and help the community collectively understand what forms of mental health self-care HCI currently supports, for whom , how ,and with what assumptions . In doing so, we also highlight the forms of mental health self-care HCI enables, privileges, and leaves un-derexplored. 

## 2 Background 

In order to distinguish our contribution as well as ground key definitions used in our review, we draw on prior work in HCI for mental health as well as self-care literature from nursing and medical scholarship. 

## 2.1 Self-Care: Conceptualizations and Tensions 

Self-care has existed from before many of today’s healthcare sys-tems were established [90]. The desire to engage in self-care is in-herent to the human and health experience, and has persisted even as care has become increasingly oriented towards professional and acute settings [60, 84]. Inspired from women’s and wellness move-ments, the focus of mental health has continued to shift towards increasing autonomy, support and community, and self-agency [60]. Within nursing and chronic-care research, self-care has com-monly been understood as individuals’ capacity to recognize and respond to their own health needs [103, 124]. However, the de-gree of independence that self-care requires varies across literature. While some definitions emphasize that self-care can be conducted alone or in coordination with others [102, 173], other literature implies that self-care is a lone activity; the recipient of care is the sole initiator and actor as an independent entity, without involve-ment from other people [46, 73], and care is reliant only on the recipient’s capabilities [146]. Consistent throughout these varied framings of self-care, though, is that the individual is more than a recipient of care and instead takes on an active role in initiating and continuing their own ongoing care [74, 102]. In our review, we accordingly treat self-care as a property of the user’s agency in executing self-care activity, which may be considered anything Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

from the management of diagnosed conditions to the maintenance or improvement of general well-being. We note that self-care is simultaneously a technical and nor-mative consideration. Critical scholarship in sociology and public health has argued that the contemporary wellness industry can translate structural determinants of health – inequality, overwork, discrimination, inadequate social infrastructure – into individual problems amenable to personal optimization [25, 35]. Furthermore, although self-governed interventions are framed as personalized, they still encode designers’ decisions and remain susceptible to bi-ases – for example, Western and clinical assumptions that may not translate across contexts [114]. Schull [138] and others have raised concerns about the quantification and gamification of self-care, and the “responsibilization” of mental healthcare to the individ-ual; technology can amplify, rather than mitigate, these dynamics by framing well-being as a set of metrics or goals to be achieved through self-reliant behaviors [82, 129]. As a result, (HCI) design of self-care technology encodes assumptions about – and marks a shift in – what individuals carry responsibility for. 

## 2.2 HCI Research in Self-Care and Mental Health 

Driven both by the scale of the global mental health crisis and by rapid technical advancements [53, 159], HCI has contributed to mental health research for several decades through a plethora of digital mental health interventions (DMHIs). These range from per-suasive and behavior-change technologies [33, 45], to tracking and sensing technologies [134, 166], and, more recently, conversational agents for mental health support [75]. The breadth of HCI in mental health can be seen through existing reviews and design frameworks that have addressed various technological approaches [2, 156], pop-ulations [22, 49], therapeutic approaches [10, 34, 66], and design and evaluation strategies [134, 143]. Prior reviews have also discussed care from the perspective of ethico-political dimensions of HCI perspectives [115] and care’s positioning in HCI (e.g., as manage-ment of conditions, as politics and advocacy) [168]; however, this prior work has not focused on self-care and mental health nor more direct relationships in HCI between self, care, and technological support. HCI scholarship at the intersection of mental health, self-care, and technology spans various epistemological traditions, methods, and conceptions of self-care that necessitate additional frameworks for synthesis. For example, Kou et al. [69] noted that both personal informatics and online mental health communities research ad-dress concepts of the self in different ways, necessitating a broader framework for understanding the "turn to self" in HCI. In terms of technology design, Slovak et al. [143] surveyed HCI research on emotion regulation interventions—many of which are used in self-care contexts—to note three levels of considerations for technol-ogy designers: theory-informed decisions utilizing psychological frameworks, strategic intervention delivery, and practical decisions around design. The HCI community has also hosted a range of initia-tives to understand how HCI in health can extend past method and technical boundaries [1, 9, 41]; our review seeks to build upon such efforts by addressing conceptualizations across the field regarding self-care interventions. Nunes et al.’s 2015 review of self-care technologies for chronic conditions provides the most direct precedent for examining self-care as an organizing concept within HCI [102]. Their review ex-amined how people use technology in self-care practices, analyzing the literature through roles, relationships, technologies, research methods, and design tensions. Beyond individual systems, self-care technology is rooted in negotiation of what users should do, what technology should do, and what role formal healthcare should re-tain [102]. Yet mental health and self-care research in HCI has had relatively limited attention in earlier literature; of the 29 studies reviewed across 30 years, Nunes et al.’s review only included three papers focused on mental health. We therefore provide a HCI re-view focused specifically on mental health and self-care, examining work published in the last decade since Nunes et al.’s review to examine the present landscape. This review is particularly timely given rapid expansion of conversational agents, AI, and immersive environments applied to mental health. Given the growing inter-section of technology mediating self-care and consequently the inherent redefining of responsibilities that now lie with users and systems, self-care is now as much an HCI problem as a healthcare problem. 

## 3 Methodology 

We conducted a scoping review to synthesize and map the landscape of HCI interventions to support mental health self-care. Scoping reviews are appropriate for emerging and interdisciplinary research areas, and are well-suited for research questions on research priori-ties, approaches, and gaps [8]. This review followed the PRISMA ex-tension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) and standard procedure for scoping review [83, 161]. A completed PRISMA-ScR checklist is available in the appendix, and our work is pre-registered through the Center for Open Science 1.

## 3.1 Stage 1: Identifying the Research Question 

We identified RQ1 , RQ2 , and RQ3 as initial questions from the onset of the project focused on why and for whom HCI centered its self-care interventions. These questions emerged out of gaps identified through initial project scoping and our team’s experiences working in HCI for mental health. In addition, we contribute six orientations of HCI and mental health self-care, which emerged during the charting phase as we noticed meaningful but uncaptured elements of technological mediation and assumptions about mental health care and self across papers. 

## 3.2 Stage 2: Identifying Relevant Studies 

Papers that contribute interventions designed for self-care do not consistently describe themselves using the term “self-care”. While there are other adjacent terms (e.g., “self-directed”, “home care”), our initial scan of papers quickly revealed that no clear set of terms was consistently used and reliably covered relevant papers. We therefore chose to not initially restrict our search to papers explicitly using the term self-care or adjacent labels, and instead gathered HCI research addressing mental health or well-being interventions broadly, followed by manual screening for relevance.   

> 1https://osf.io/vxr8s/overview?view_only=d35754c675dc49c68fb31f56f1c768f0 CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu Initial corpus from ACM
> Digital Library
> N = 458 papers 61 removed
> 358 papers
> for full text review
> 81 papers
> deemed eligible

91 papers 

included for review   

> Final Inclusion  Screening  Identification
> De-duplication
> Non-archival works
> Title and abstract
> screening 39 removed
> Excluded 66 removed (Criterion: Mental Health)
> 81 removed (Criterion: Self-Care)
> 130 removed (Criterion: Intervention)
> 397 papers
> for title/abstract review
> 10 papers from forward and
> backward citation search

Figure 2: Diagram for each stage of identification, screening, and final inclusion. Eligibility criteria are listed sequentially in order of application. 

First, consistent with prior reviews on mental health [10, 102, 156], we searched for general mental health and well-being key-words. We searched for mental health-related terms such as “ mental health ”, “ mental wellbeing ”, “ emotional wellbeing ”, and “ psychologi-cal health ”. We also considered more specific keywords (e.g., ‘stress’, ‘PTSD’, ‘depression’) but decided to not pre-determine or prioritize particular constructs of mental health. Second, we searched for intervention-related terms given our scope for HCI’s interventions for self-care, drawing on prior work [118]. These terms included “intervention ”, “ app ”, “ tool ”, “ system ” and “ prototype ”. The full query is available in the appendix. Mental health and intervention-related terms were searched in titles, keywords, and abstracts. Full-text searching produced over 62,000 records, the huge majority of which mentioned mental health only incidentally. We conducted our search in May and June 2026, and covered papers published in 2015 onwards (see Section 2). Given our focus on HCI interventions and following standard for scoping reviews focused on HCI contributions [151], we identified articles from the ACM Digital Library to include all SIGCHI conferences and TOCHI, following prior methods from HCI reviews [134, 168] to capture a manageable and representative sample of HCI contributions. Our initial search included papers from CHI, UbiComp, DIS, UIST, HRI, ICMI-MLMI, CSCW, IUI, IDC, UMAP, MobileHCI, VRST, C&C, CUI, TEI, HAI, IMX, CHI PLAY, SCW, and TOCHI. We restricted our search to papers written in English and full research articles in order to gather sufficient detail for data extraction. We obtained 458 unique records through the keyword search and removed 61 papers that were incorrectly classified as full papers by ACM Digital Library or duplicates, leaving 397 papers for screening. 

## 3.3 Stage 3: Selecting Relevant Literature 

3.3.1 Initial Title and Abstract Screening. In the first phase of screen-ing, the first author screened papers by title and abstract to exclude papers that were clearly out of scope. Papers were excluded at this stage when it was clear that mental health was mentioned inci-dentally; these included papers focused on other types of health (e.g., diabetes, physical therapy) or technical contribution without focus on users (e.g., eye-tracking methods). In total, 39 papers were removed during title and abstract screening. 

3.3.2 Eligibility. Three authors reviewed the title, abstract, and full text of the remaining corpus to conduct eligibility screening. Eligibility criteria were developed iteratively by the research team through weekly meetings (one- to two-hours over five weeks) with the goal of identifying papers that designed and contributed an intervention for mental health self-care (see Table 1). During the initial rounds, all coders jointly reviewed paper abstracts to build a shared set of criteria that we then applied to a random set of 40 papers drawn from the screened papers (n=358). However, our initial calibrations produced insufficient independent agreement (proportionate agreement around 0.5), thus leading to further dis-cussion on recurring ambiguities, refinement of inclusion criteria, and synchronous review of 6-10 papers in order to resolve disagree-ments. After this process and a final round of a new random set of 40 papers for independent coding, the team reached substan-tial agreement for Criterion: Mental Health (Fleiss’ 𝜅 = 0.65 2) and nearly perfect agreement for Criterion: Self-Care ( 𝜅 = 0.83) and Criterion: Intervention ( 𝜅 = 0.85).  

> 2Mental Health was met by a large portion of papers, so the presented agreement statistics is lower than raw agreement. Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA

Table 1: Eligibility criteria and examples illustrating their boundaries. Papers were included only when they met all three criteria.         

> Criterion Included Excluded Boundary case Mental Health The paper is focused on mental health and well-being, including both clinical and non-clinical mental health concerns. We distinguish neurodevelopmental conditions and neurocognitive conditions from mental health conditions [123, 132, 172]. We excluded papers if the focus was on concepts that may plausibly affect mental health (e.g., productivity) but do not centrally position mental health. An intervention concerning autism is included when addressing a mental health concern (such as of autistic people) was central to its objective.
> Self-Care The paper has design intent towards self-care, an individual’s practices in understanding, maintaining, and improving their own health. Self-care is initiated and carried out by the end-user who it intends to benefit. We excluded papers about care primarily dependent on another person. Definitions vary on whether self-care can include collaboration with others (see Section 2); we did not exclude work solely due to incorporating other people or resources, but excluded if the care depended on another person’s active participation or co-regulation. A chatbot that gives emotional support to a user may be included; a conversational interface that connects users to therapists is not.
> Intervention The paper contributed a designed intervention – such as a usable prototype, tool, or other system artifact – and described its intended or observed interaction with users. We excluded papers that study use of existing infrastructure (e.g., helplines), as opposed to contributing the design of an intervention itself, given our focus and research questions. A paper that contributes an emotional support chatbot system is included, while an observational study of how people use chatbots was not.

Using the above set of criteria, a total of 22.3% of papers were full text reviewed by all three authors and the remaining were completed by the first author; the first author then brought 11 uncertain cases back to the research team to be resolved through discussion. Our final corpus consisted of 81 papers that met all three criteria. Forward and backward citation search was then conducted, which yielded 10 papers that passed screening and eligibility. Repeated citation searching on these newly included papers resulted in no additional eligible papers identified, producing a final corpus of 91 papers .

## 3.4 Stage 4: Charting the Data 

Next, we created a charting template to extract relevant items from the final corpus (n=91) in order to answer our research questions. First, we identified descriptive characteristics to extract from each paper including publication year, venue, and country (of the first author’s listed affiliation). Next, three authors established a shared analytical framework that enabled us to collect and analyze standard information from each study according to our research questions: who and what mental health needs are accounted for in a paper’s contributed intervention(s) (RQ1), the self-care activities conducted by users (RQ2), and the paper’s core contribution (RQ3). The final extraction template is presented in the appendix and consisted of the following dimensions. First, we recorded each paper’s targeted user population , participant population , and target mental health issue (e.g., depression, stress) that was being addressed by the paper’s intervention. We coded the target user population dis-tinctly from the participant population, as papers do not necessarily use the same criteria. We marked “general” when the population was either explicitly framed as such or inferred as such from a full text read when they imposed no population-specific boundary on the intervention’s design or intended users. Next, we summarized each paper’s intervention functionalities and its intervention ap-proach . We first provided a summary of the intervention in a short paragraph, then recorded an intervention’s user activity (e.g., jour-naling, meditation), technological affordances for supporting that activity (e.g., recording user behavior, notifying an action), and 

the technological platform(s) used. Lastly, we charted the paper’s 

contribution through a short summary of its contribution statement and any presented justification for focusing on self-directed care, particularly in contrast to other forms of care, e.g., clinical or peer support. Note that several of the above dimensions could be multi-coded, as an intervention may target multiple groups of users or contain a suite of functions. With the final template, three authors independently charted a random set of 10 papers of the final corpus (n=91). The first author then completed a draft of charting the remaining papers, cross-checked by second and third authors iteratively over multiple rounds. The team repeatedly discussed ambiguities, hypothetical, and boundary cases, as well as refined code definitions in synchro-nous weekly meetings until reaching consensus. 

## 3.5 Stage 5: Collating, Summarizing, and Reporting Results 

3.5.1 Descriptive Findings: Themes in HCI for Mental Health Self-Care. We applied descriptive analysis to capture trends in publica-tion year, venue, and country. To answer RQ1-RQ3, we conducted thematic analysis [31] to identify overarching themes and patterns in the charted data. We first familiarized ourselves with the final charted data and generated a set of meaningful second-order codes when necessary, then grouped codes into candidate themes that captured broader patterns across the data. We then iteratively re-fined these themes, defining each according to its central organizing concept and boundaries. Finally, we synthesized the themes into CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

an overarching narrative to develop our findings. Additionally, we examined relationships across dimensions, such as mental health topics and technological affordances. 

3.5.2 Emergent Findings: Six Orientations of Mental Health Self-Care in HCI. During the charting phase, our team also discovered emergent, shared views across papers regarding the role of self and technology in HCI for self-care, which was not captured by RQ1-RQ3 nor explicitly stated in prior work. Here, we leveraged higher-level interpretive synthesis on how interventions configured the relationship among self , care , and technology by examining across dimensions in the charted data. We conducted this synthesis in three stages. First, all authors observed existing codes and themes related to user activities , technology functions , and intervention description 

of papers. Second, we generated care operationalization notes for each intervention. These described the care ‘operation’ of the in-tervention in delivering a user activity, and both the aspects of self deemed important to care for as well as the technical affordances (e.g., surfaces data about behaviors, prompting an action) that made the care operation possible. Third, we clustered these notes into 

orientations of self-care based on our shared interpretations of the re-lationship between user activities, technological functions, and the intended contribution to supporting care. This process was done by a team of three authors through synchronous walk-the-wall affinity diagramming, followed by discussions to resolve disagree-ment, comparison against the corpus, examining prototypical and boundary cases, verifying the orientations against the entire (n=91) corpus, and iterative refinement until team agreement on shared interpretation of the orientations [81]. We do not report IRR here due to the reflexive, interpretive, and recursive nature of forming this framework [19, 91]. 

## 4 Results 

In this section, we characterize when and where the corpus was published (Section 4.1), for whom interventions were designed for and for what mental health issues (RQ1, Section 4.2 and 4.3), 

what self-care activities were supported (RQ2, Section 4.4), and framing of core contributions addressed by papers’ interventions (RQ3, Section 4.5). Coding for the 91 papers and all of the above findings is available in the appendix. This analysis grounds our understanding of the landscape of HCI mental-health self-care, and we later present emergent, synthesized orientations of how HCI interventions enact different orientations toward the self and care (Section 5). 

## 4.1 Descriptive Characteristics 

Our review of 91 papers spans from 2015 until June 2026. While people have long engaged in home monitoring, symptom tracking, and self-directed coping, the scope of HCI interventions regarding self-care for mental health has expanded rapidly (Figure 3). Lit-tle work before this time period focused on self-care for mental health conditions ([102], see Section 2), indicating that this review is particularly timely. This growth is not solely attributed to overall publication growth; for example, the count of papers in our corpus at just CHI jumped from 1 paper in 2020 to 13 papers in 2025 while publication numbers at CHI grew about 64% in the same time frame. The literature is primarily published at CHI (60.4%) and DIS (17.6%); all remaining venues contributed no more than three papers each. In terms of the first author’s affiliated country, the regional composition of the corpus has shifted over time; Asia contributed one paper in our corpus from 2015 to 2019 but a proportional share of 20% to 47.4% annually since 2020 (Figure 3). Overall, the corpus has first authors affiliated from 21 countries across North America (n=36, 39.6%), Asia (n=27, 29.7%), Europe (n=26, 28.6%), and Oceania (n=2, 2.2%). The United States is the most represented country, followed by South Korea and Canada (Figure 3). 

## 4.2 Who Interventions Are Designed For 

We present five themes of populations that interventions targeted: 

mental health disorders (n=11, 12.1%), disability (n=6, 6.6%), demo-graphics (n=22, 24.2%), occupational and social roles (n=14, 15.4%), and general (n=43, 47.3%). A paper could fill multiple codes (e.g., children with disability as demographics and disability [7]). 

4.2.1 Mental Health Disorders. Interventions focused on people with depression (n=3), eating disorders (n=2), bipolar disorder (n=1), schizophrenia (n=1), panic disorder (n=1), and personality disor-der (n=1). Two additional papers targeted people with “complex, difficult-to-treat disorders and suicidal behavior” [137] and “mental health patients” broadly without specifying particular diagnosis [144]. Only one intervention was explicitly built for people with anxiety disorders (panic disorder [128]). 

4.2.2 Disability. A handful of papers contributed interventions for autistic people 3 (n=3), people with learning disability (n=1), ADHD (n=1), or Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing (DHH) individuals (n=1). These papers examined disability-specific needs shaped by intersecting mental health experiences [61, 94, 142]. Work by Thieme et al. [157] cuts across multiple, intersecting identities as it studies women in se-cure hospital units who experience borderline personality disorder and learning disability. Overall, however, the diversity of disabil-ity experiences and well-known intersectional nature with mental health [5, 20] has been designed for by relatively few interventions in HCI. Note that we include these populations here for organizational purposes but fully acknowledge no universal preference among people on identifying as disabled considering both medical and social models, such as for d/Deaf people. 

4.2.3 Demographics. Demographics designed for included age, gender, non-WEIRD, and socio-economic status. Age was the most common factor. Papers often focused on youth, including pre-adolescent children (n=6) to teenagers (n=4), motivated by the importance of teaching self-care skills to children [107, 140, 147] and prevalence of poor mental health [6, 65, 152]. Older adults (n=7) were also framed as in-need due to being socially isolated [47, 131, 169] and having unique design needs to overcome bar-riers in adopting self-care interventions [153]. Women’s mental health was the focus of five papers, including adolescent girls [152],          

> 3While there is no universally preferred language, we use identity-first language in this work given its preference by many autistic people as indicating identity inseparable from personhood. Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA U.S. — 22 (24.2%)
> South Korea — 14 (15.4%)
> Canada — 14 (15.4%)
> China — 9 (9.9%)
> UK — 9 (9.9%)
> Germany — 6 (6.6%)
> Netherlands — 3 (3.3%)
> Other (n=1 each) — 14 (15.4%)
> Australia, France, Denmark,
> Ireland, New Zealand,
> Switzerland, Pakistan, Finland,
> Singapore, Belgium, Spain, Hong
> Kong, Saudi Arabia, Sweden

Figure 3: Count of papers in our corpus per year (top left) and regional proportions per year (top right); 2026 (partial year) values are visualized at 50% opacity. Also shown is the count of papers from each country (bottom). 

young women [149], women in non-WEIRD contexts [3], women in hospital care units [157], and pregnant women [37]. 

4.2.4 Occupational and Social Roles. Papers focused on university students (n=10), workers (n=3), and caregivers (n=1). For university students, interventions acknowledged significant mental health struggles and academic pressure among college students [27, 97], and context-specific stressful experiences, such as public speaking [122]. Interventions for workers were mostly intended to fit within work routines (e.g., browser plugins [158], passive stress monitoring around the office [40]). Surprisingly, only one paper in our corpus contributed an intervention for care giver self-support [54]. 

4.2.5 General or Unspecified population. Papers most commonly contributed interventions for a “general population” or provided no population-specific framing based on mental health experiences, demographics, or other descriptors. We aggregate these papers be-cause neither establishes a population-specific boundary around the intervention, and the latter’s absence of any specification im-plies the intervention as rhetorically applicable to a general or undifferentiated user. We further examined the participant population for papers in this theme, surfacing here how mental health experiences are included or excluded for interventions aimed at either general or unspecified people. In this theme, 15 (34.9%) papers explicitly excluded people with clinical symptoms or diagnoses, while 44.2% did not report any health status criteria or were too vague to be determined (‘healthy participants’). We note that the papers that excluded people with diagnosis also sometimes extended to any prior or suspected diag-nosis, those who are in therapy or taking medication, or any mental health diagnosis broadly (even outside the work’s mental health topic of focus) [43, 78, 111, 136]. Papers justified these exclusions through safety or ethical considerations, or provided no rationale. Only one paper explicitly acknowledged that excluding clinical populations was in tension with its stated goal of designing for a general population [163]. Seven papers (16.3%) included people regardless of mental health experiences, either articulating the de-cision to not screen or screening for mental health status but not excluding any participants based on this screening (e.g., [145], [79]). Interestingly, two papers (4.7%) were restricted to those with high levels of stress symptoms although they were for a general popula-tion [57, 58], citing that including those with low levels of stress would be unsuitable for a stress management study or introduce biased data. Overall, “general population” was the most common population but encompassed different approaches to clinical inclusion and exclusion. We discuss implications of this in Discussion regarding how ’general’ self-care interventions in HCI may be frequently focusing on a distinct slice of ’healthy’ individuals. 

## 4.3 What Mental Health Topics Interventions Are Designed For 

We discovered 12 mental health topics that interventions target: 

anxiety (n=9, 9.9%), depression (n=7, 7.7%), stress and relaxation 

(n=15, 16.5%), mindfulness (n=14, 15.4%), social connectedness and CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

Table 2: Corpus (n=91) characteristics for Sections 4.2-4.4. Papers could be multi-coded to accurately represent their contents, since papers on mental health can often address multiple populations, mental health topics, and/or activities.                                                                  

> Population
> Theme N%General 43 47.3% Demographic Groups 22 24.2% Occup. & Social Groups 14 15.4% Mental Health Disorder 11 12.1% Disability 66.6%
> Mental Health Topic
> Theme N%General Well-Being 17 18.7% Emotional Awareness & Reflection 17 18.7% Emotional Regulation 16 17.6% Stress & Relaxation 15 16.5% Mindfulness 14 15.4% Emot. Expression 10 11.0% Anxiety 99.9% Social Connectedness 88.8% Depression 77.7% Bipolar 11.1% Eating Disorders 11.1% Schizophrenia 11.1%
> Self-Care Activity
> Theme N%Conversing & Social Support 25 27.5% Tracking 22 24.2% Meditation 13 14.3% Sensory Regulation 13 14.3% Journaling 11 12.1% Artistic/Creative Expression 77.7% Music/Calming Sounds 66.6% Treatment Programs 44.4% Gaming 33.3% Embodied/Metaphorical Actions 33.3% Goal Setting 33.3% Reminiscence 22.2% Informational Resources 22.2%

loneliness (n=8, 8.8%), emotional expression (n=10, 11%), emotional awareness and reflection (n=17, 18.7%), emotional regulation (n=16, 17.6%), bipolar (n=1, 1.1%), eating disorders (n=1, 1.1%), schizophrenia 

spectrum (n=1, 1.1%), and general well-being (n=17, 18.7%). 22 papers (24.2%) addressed more than one topic. The most prevalent topics were broad, non-diagnostic forms of mental well-being. General Well-Being encompassed general emotional support without particular focus or following healthy habits [141, 182, 184]. Emotional Awareness and Reflection 

interventions were aimed at drawing users’ attention to their emo-tions [175] or prompting reflection [56, 120, 145]. In contrast, Emo-tional Regulation interventions aimed to help users manage their emotional responses, often through self-soothing strategies. For example, FAR uses tactile vibration to help self-regulation by fol-lowing slow breathing, and [65] uses VR to train emotion regula-tion skills. Emotional Expression considered the expression of thoughts or emotions as good for mental health, whether through expressive writing, conversation, or digital or tangible art. While emotion-related topics co-occurred (e.g., 5 papers with Emotional Awareness and Reflection & Emotional Regulation), they did not overlap substantially, indicating that these themes captured distinct forms of well-being. A smaller set of interventions addressed Social Connectedness and Loneliness .Papers addressing Stress and Relaxation focused on general stress rather than stress disorders (e.g., PTSD). Reducing Depres-sion was also somewhat common but often focused on the general psychological experience as opposed to clinical symptoms of de-pression; similarly, Anxiety was targeted in nine papers with eight referencing anxiety vaguely/generally or as an everyday psycho-logical experience – with the exception of panic disorder in [128]. As seen in Section 4.2, designing for clinically anxious people was also not common; anxiety is thus often treated as a general ex-perience but not a clinical one. A smaller set of papers explicitly targeted clinical diagnosis, with 1 paper each for bipolar disorder [86], schizophrenia [176], and eating disorders [28]. Taken together, our analysis of intended populations and mental health topics shows that HCI has predominantly positioned mental health self-care around ‘everyday’ well-being and psychological experiences. 

## 4.4 What Self-Care Activities Interventions Support 

In addition to who and what interventions targeted, we examined what users do – in other words, the self-care activity that the user engages in for mental health benefit, rather than the technology or modality. For example, journaling was coded as such regardless of whether it was supported through a mobile application, conversa-tional system, or VR environment. In this way, activity captures the 

self-care practice that the intervention facilitates while remaining agnostic to the technology. Activities identified were: conversing and social support (n=25, 27.5%), tracking (n=22, 24.2%), meditation 

(n=13, 14.3%), sensory regulation (n=13, 14.3%), journaling (n=11, 12.1%), artistic and creative expression (n=7, 7.7%), listening to music or calming sounds (n=6, 6.6%), treatment programs (n=4, 4.4%), gam-ing (n=3, 3.3%), embodied or metaphorical actions (n=3, 3.3%), goal setting (n=3, 3.3%), reminiscence (n=2, 2.2%), and reading information resources (n=2, 2.2%). 

Conversing and social support were the most common, largely driven by generative conversational agents. These interventions enabled users to converse with a simulated partner, disclose experi-ences to an agent, and engage in supportive dialogue. Tracking and monitoring facilitated users recording behaviors, emotions, physiological states, or other aspects of everyday experience. This drew from the established HCI tradition of personal and lived in-formatics in which systems help people reflect on personal data to develop self-knowledge and inform action [76, 127]. Together, conversing and self-tracking represent two frequent paradigms of technologically mediated self-care: one being relational and interac-tional, and the other oriented towards a traditional, individualistic understanding of the self’s state. Additionally, meditation and mindfulness , sensory or physiological self-regulation , and 

journaling appeared in many interventions across recent years, perhaps due to turn of third-wave HCI focusing on somatic, embod-ied approaches and meaning-making among one’s own experiences Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

[17, 80]. Overall, the corpus includes considerable technological diversity through XR, text-based and embodied virtual agents, mo-bile apps, and more, but underlying activities supported by these systems are often recognizable self-care practices. 

## 4.5 What Contributions HCI Interventions Make to Self-Care 

Authors framed their contribution and the gap addressed by their interventions in eight ways, which we present in four themes: 

Accessibility of Self-Care (n=34, 37.4%), Supporting Engagement and Sustained Use (n=33, 36.3%), Enabling Self-Care in Everyday Life 

(n=28, 30.8%), and Enhancing Self-Care Activities (n=14, 15.4%) (Table 3). In presenting these contributions, we also discuss how each of the above themes surfaces new responsibilities for “self” (the user) and systems in the landscape of self-care. While we aimed to identify each paper’s primary framing of its contribution, we assigned multiple codes when a single category was insufficient (n=24, 26.4%). 

4.5.1 Accessibility of Self-Care. Many papers in our corpus deliv-ered interventions that aimed to fill a gap in addressing underserved populations and contexts (n=32, 35.2%). These populations were of-ten those in-need due to intersectional struggles with mental health – for example, [61] and [142] addressed autistic people, who face high rates of anxiety and further daily functioning struggles from poor mental health. Fewer papers addressed enhancing scalabil-ity . In contrast to addressing particular populations, these papers attempted to reduce broader barriers such as cost and availabil-ity through, for example, designing interventions with low-cost, off-the-shelf commercial hardware [7] or able to be deployed in low-SES communities [6]. Overall, papers in this theme often motivate their use of DMHIs by its ability to make healthcare available to more people given limitations of cost and personnel in conventional care. Implicitly, papers then shift responsibility to designers and their systems to make that care (1) sufficiently effective for diverse needs and (2) cost-effective and available. Our findings reveal that addressing un-derserved community needs is a common contribution motivation, but goals of scalability are comparatively addressed less. While cost is frequently cited across our corpus as a motivation for DMHIs, relatively few papers treated it as an explicit design goal – perhaps due to accessibility being assumed as simply inherent to DMHIs. 

4.5.2 Supporting Engagement and Sustained Use. In conventional care, providers and institutions help tailor treatment and sustain participation through appointments and therapeutic alliance; in self-care, this responsibility can shift to users, who sustain their own engagement with systems that continually make participation compelling. Papers thus positioned contributions around adher-ence (n=15, 16.5%), to design interactive or motivating interven-tions to address dropout – a persistent challenge across digital mental health and self-care [12, 160]. Relatedly, personalization & context-awareness (n=22, 24%) made self-care more relevant to users, accounting for day-to-day, in-the-moment changes given that self-care is not bounded to formal settings. This occurred through (a) user personalization , where users directly indicate their prefer-ences (e.g., [77, 182]); (b) automatic personalization , where systems adapted based on users’ characteristics or behaviors (e.g., [68, 174]); and (c) context-awareness , where systems adapted to situational contexts (e.g., [51, 57, 97]). 

4.5.3 Enabling (Safe) Self-Care in Everyday Life. Although all pa-pers in the corpus concerned self-care outside conventional treat-ment to some extent, 14 papers (15.4%) explicitly shaped the inter-vention around shifting to everyday contexts , transforming formal practices into fundamentally “casual” ones [155] and supporting mental health conditions but outside formal care [28]. While con-ventional care is largely organized around scheduled encounters and designated treatment settings, self-care relies on users to de-cide when, where, and under what circumstances care is needed. Because of the flexibility of self-care DMHIs, systems also have to translate existing practices to be available outside these formal settings. Some papers focused on the translation of clinical care (n=9, 10%) into digital resources that users can now access independently [137], or demonstrated usefulness of clinician involvement but for designing self-directed care treatment [157]. However, independent use with less continuous oversight also raises questions of appro-priate, trustworthy, and safe support . 7 papers (7.7%) contributed in-terventions that were centrally designed around addressing privacy [153], explainability [64], trust [77, 153], and ethics in AI-driven conversational and predictive technologies [28, 63, 174, 176]. 

4.5.4 Enhancing Self-Care Activity through Novel Interaction. Some interventions (n=14, 15.4%) expanded what people could do as self-care by applying novel interaction and modalities to existing prac-tices. Examples included combining generative AI with journaling [184], using predictive analysis to provide counterfactual stress-coping [92], and using generative co-creation to support reflection [56]. Whereas other themes expanded who can access self-care or 

where it can occur, these papers expanded what people can do , posi-tioning technology as a means of transforming practices through which self-care is achieved. While providers conventionally select and facilitate established therapeutic or reflective activities and help users interpret their experiences, self-care technologies can create new representations and activities; unlike conventional care, though, these are not subject to the same clinical requirements in being ‘prescribed’. 

## 5 Six Orientations of Mental Health Self-Care in HCI 

Next, we surface six recurring orientations that describe how tech-nological mediation is expected to enable care across the papers in our corpus. These orientations reflect recurring normative configu-ration of three related elements: (1) the aspect of the self treated as the object of care, (2) the operation through which care is expected to occur, (3) the mediating role supported by technology . They emerged through cross-dimensional analysis of our charting data, drawing on dimensions including intervention goals, self-care activities, and technological functions (Section 3.5). The six orientations are: Making the Self Tangible (n=34, 37.4%), Quantifying the Self (n=29, 31.9%), Training Self-Care Skills (n=21, 23.1%), Enacting Social Care (n=18, 19.8%), Facilitat-ing Action (n=14, 15.4%), and Attending to Affective Experience 

(n=10, 11%), presented in Table 4 and Figure 1. The orientations CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

Table 3: Core contributions to mental health self-care identified across the corpus and framed by a paper, organized by theme. 

Theme Sub-Theme Description Prototypical Example 𝑁 

Accessibility of Self-Care 

Addressing Underserved Populations & Contexts 

Adapts mental health self-care to populations whose needs are not met from conventional care and/or current technologies. 

CSESC provides a culturally aware, Arabic-language chatbot for Saudi young women [3]. 32 

Scalability Frames contribution as addressing barriers related to cost and availability. 

StressShoe contributes a low-cost way to self-track stress using off-the-shelf, shoe-mounted sensors [40]. 5

Supporting Engagement and Sustained Use 

Engagement & Adherence Addresses dropout in self-care interventions through engaging, interactive, or motivating designs. 

ARCADIA uses mixed-reality and biofeedback to allow users to regulate emotions in a ’self-care garden’, providing a creative and motivating way to address patients’ declining adherence. [144]. 15 

Personalization & Context-Awareness 

Contribution is aimed at incorporating users’ preferences, characteristics, or contexts into adaptive DMHIs. A personalizable therapy chatbot where users can customize therapy style and personality, and input their intentions [162]. 22 

Enabling Self-Care in Everyday Life 

Shifting to Everyday Contexts 

Positions contribution as fundamentally shifting mental health towards everyday and in-the-moment needs. 

Mindful Moments integrates mindfulness practice into smartglasses in order to bring ‘casual’ mindfulness into realistic, day-to-day walking. [155]. 14 

Translating Clinical Care Beyond Clinical Settings 

Translates evidence-based therapeutic models and grounded professional expertise into self-care technologies. 

MoodRhythm translates clinical therapy for bipolar disorder into a mobile app, and shows the value of low-level understanding through real-world design alongside clinicians & patients [86]. 9

Safety & Trust Addresses reliability, privacy, ethical concerns, and risks associated with self-directed (and increasingly AI-mediated) mental health support. 

MESA-Bot attempt to mitigate older adult concerns in adopting mental health chatbots through addressing accessibility, privacy, and security [153]. 7

Enhancing Self-Care Activities 

Enhancing Self-Care Activity through Novel Interaction 

Introduces new interaction mechanisms for self-care activities; expands the ways in which self-care activities can be enacted. 

Mind Mansion helps user cope with negative thoughts through interacting with a messy apartment in VR, where mess (puddles, dirt) is labeled with negative thoughts and cleaned [121]. 14 

> Note : Contribution categories were not mutually exclusive. Papers could be coded to multiple themes, so totals exceed corpus n=91.

represent interpretations of how the reviewed papers frame and operationalize care through intervention design. The orientations address a different analytical question from the descriptive categories in Section 4. While an activity describes what the user does and mental health topics serve as goals, an orientation 

reflects shared assumptions about how technological mediation is expected to constitute care. For example, conversation may provide an opportunity to rehearse a skill or to experience a supportive relationship; these interactions share an activity but address differ-ent aspects of self through different care operations. Conversely, a conversational interface and an immersive environment may both support the training of self-care skills. As such, interventions often grouped together by activity, platform, or population can enact different orientations. This framework deviates from prior mod-els [102, 134, 143, 168] in offering a new lens to explicitly view the shared assumptions and relationship in mental health self-care technologies between the self, care, and technology .In presenting the orientations below, we describe how inter-ventions address the aspect of self that a person seeks self-care for, the care operation, defining boundaries of each orientation, and prototypical examples (Table 4). Note that these orientations were not intended to be mutually exclusive, although we focused on labeling an orientation only when its care logic was central to an intervention. 61.5% of these interventions had one orientation, while the remaining addressed two. Both a Venn (Figure 1) and Upset diagram (Figure 4) show the distribution of papers across orientations. We also highlight example interventions that address multiple orientations in Figure 5. Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

Table 4: Six orientations represent recurring forms of care enacted by technology. 

Orientation Aspect of Self To Care For Care Operation Common Technology Functions Defining Boundary Prototypical Example Making the Self Tangible 

Internal thoughts and experiences Externalizing and re-interpreting 

internal experience .Reflecting physiological states; allowing free-form expression; embodying the user’s state; generating new representation of user’s state Representations function primarily as materials for expression, interpretation, or meaning-making. 

Inner Garden is a sandbox that changes landscape according to the user’s breathing and heart rate [126]. 

Quantifying the Self 

Data, patterns Measuring and surfacing data, states, and patterns .Allowing users to self-record data; reflecting physiological state; aggregating data; sensing or predicting state Calculates and surfaces evidence about the self’s patterns, in order to provide knowledge. 

MoodRhythm allows bipolar patients to track basic routines like waking and meal times to track how they meet routine & mental health goals [86]. 

Enacting Social Care 

Social and relational Mediating or simulating social interaction .Mimicking a person; simulating social interaction A human or human-like social interaction is central to the care mechanism. 

Vincent is a chatbot that the user must care for, as a way to create self-compassion [72]. 

Training Self-Care Skills 

Capabilities Instructing or providing practice for a skill .Educating about a skill; guiding users through a practice The intended outcome is developing a capability that the user can subsequently apply. 

Pocket Skills is a conversational interface that teaches and supports the practice of core DBT skills [137]. 

Facilitating Action 

Direct actions Prompting actions . Notifying to do an action; guiding users through a practice Technology supports actions or behaviors that move the user towards an existing or suggested goal. 

Home Sweet Office nudges workers to conduct brief stress-reduction activities during the workday [158]. 

Attending to Affective Experience 

Affect and felt experience Regulating and soothing felt experience .Evoking an emotion; directly regulating or soothing; simulating or mimicking a person The object of care is the user’s immediate emotional experience, typically for direct soothing. 

Awedyssey is a VR experience built to trigger awe in order to support user’s emotional and mental well-being [93].  

> Note. Orientations are not mutually exclusive. Technology functions are the most frequently coded items to guide understanding of the orientations, rather than an exhaustive list.

## 5.1 Orientation 1: Making the Self Tangible 

“[MoodShaper] allows users to autonomously create a virtual environment with the purpose of expressing emotions...by pro-viding means for users to manipulate visual representations of negative emotions in VR” [163] 

A prominent assumption throughout our corpus is that a per-son may have internal experiences , such as thoughts and emotions, that are difficult to articulate or engage with. As a result, a person cares for themselves by turning self-experience into a percepti-ble, interactive form; this interaction allows for better expression, meaning-making, and/or regulation. Technology makes this self-directed engagement possible by providing expressive materials or transforming an internal state into visual, written, auditory, em-bodied, or physical form. Note that we use tangible broadly – the resulting form did not need to be a physical object, but could instead be visual or written form, embodied, or auditory form. We identified two ways that technology supported people’s re-interpretation of their self: (1) system-mediated transformation that uses embodied and interactive approaches to transform the person’s state into a ‘tangible’ form or (2) user-mediated transformation, where technology provides the space and ‘materials’ for the user to transform their own state into a new ‘tangible’ form (e.g., language, art). An example of the former is Mirror Ritual that estimated facial expression and generated a poem in response in order to allow for better self-reflection by the user [120], and an example of the latter is Mood Worlds that allowed users to paint their emotions into 3D environments to better visualize their emotional well-being [164]. These processes may also be serialized as seen in NoRe , which asked users to first articulate their experience into a journal with an emotion regulation intention, after which the system re-interpreted that entry into music [108]. This orientation entails a particular conception of the self, where externalization is the necessary process by which internal state can be meaningfully reflected upon. Since a person may not have con-venient means to transform their state into engaging, interactive CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

Figure 4: Upset diagram showing distribution of papers among the six orientations of HCI for self-care. 

forms, they may turn to DMHIs. This often draws from tangible and embodied interaction, as well as somaesthetics of third-wave HCI [17, 80]. Tangible interaction often sought to move information beyond screen-based representations by giving it perceptible and manipulable form; meaning is produced through bodily or ‘physical’ engagement [38]. Interventions in this theme extend these tradi-tions through technological mediation that provides the materials by which the self can interact with internal experience through (virtual) objects [121], dynamic landscapes and physical movement [119, 126], and drawings, poems, or music [164, 165, 179]. 

5.1.1 Function of Technology. The core technological functions in this orientation concerned making internal experience perceptible. 12 papers did so through technical affordances to reflect the user’s physiological state , translating signals such as breathing or arousal into feedback that could be seen, heard, felt, or manipulated. Other papers allowed users to free-form express thoughts, feelings, or experiences through an open expressive medium such as art (n=9), directly transformed and embodied the user’s experience into an interactive (often digital) object to manipulate (n=7), or AI-generated representations of the user’s emotions, such as into a poem or music (n=4). 

## 5.2 Orientation 2: Quantifying the Self  

> “[DeepStress] visualizes self-tracked data such as stress changes over time, and provides summarized stress information for each context...DeepStress facilitated data-driven self-reflection, enabling users to pinpoint stressful contexts.” [58]

Interventions categorized in Quantifying the Self similarly rely on self-understanding for internal parts of the self, but instead for users to gain knowledge on data and patterns and inform subsequent choices. Whereas Making the Self Tangible primarily renders expe-rience into an expressive form for meaning-making, interventions for Quantifying the Self instead view the self-state as data evidence from which factual measurement and knowledge about the self’s patterns can be made. This orientation carries an epistemic claim: by centering the recording and pattern-making of self-data, the in-tervention positions the self as knowable through aggregation and observation over time. Interventions use experiences such as mood, sleep, medication, and other routines as states to be documented and made sense of through pattern. Note that quantification as used in this work can refer more broadly to structuring of experience as evidence for patterns, rather than only numerical measurement. As a result, interventions that allow users to record a log of qualitative data can also carry the same assumptions in this orientation, where patterns are to be extracted and aggregated across time or context. 

Quantifying the Self closely draws from personal informatics and the “Quantified Self”, which frame personal data as resources for self-knowledge [82]. Interventions in this orientation position technology as an instrument that records these states and makes them available for the user’s observation, either as care in itself or to prompt future action. The underlying assumption of these interventions is that user-led or system-led recording and surfacing of data patterns could reveal something consequential about the person; interventions thus decide what measurements and patterns count as meaningful knowledge about the self. 

5.2.1 Function of Technology. In Quantifying the Self , 14 papers were centered around facilitating users to self-track data in order to surface patterns, while 3 papers had interventions focused on contributing sensing or passive recording methods. Other function-alities present included aggregating information into summaries Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

or visualizations for users to view (n=4) and prediction (such as of relapse or an oncoming mental health episode) based on the user’s data (n=4). Conversely, an intervention that relies on data is not necessarily carrying the same assumptions as Quantifying the Self if data of the self is not treated as underlying patterns to be known. Mirror Ritual [120] and DeepStress [58] illustrate the distinction; while Mirror Ritual detects facial expression to generate a poem and offer a representation with which the user can interpret their experience and emotion, DeepStress organizes self-tracked stress information across time and context to help users identify stressful situations. We interpret the former as emphasizing the expressive and interpre-tive possibilities of a representation for the self-state, and the latter as emphasizing patterns made available through recorded data. The distinction therefore concerns the role that a representation plays in care, rather than whether the system uses data; of course, inter-ventions may also perform both care actions (Figure 5). Papers in this orientation did often touch on other self-care orientations as well. For example, six papers also notified or nudged the user to do some action ( Facilitating Action , see Section 5.4) based on patterns identified through this quantification. 

## 5.3 Orientation 3: Training Self-Care Skills  

> “mobile application that leverages the power of storytelling ... interactive scenarios and contextualised storylines can not only educate users about the psychological concepts that underpin the process of CBT but also enable the internalisation of these learned concepts” [48]

In interventions focused on Training Self-Care Skills , the self is conceived as having a set of capabilities that can be developed through learning and practice. Rather than treating well-being as a state to be represented or measured, these interventions position the self as an agent whose ability to care for itself can be cultivated. Therefore, the user pursues these interventions to develop their future capacity to (independently) recognize, regulate, or respond to difficult experiences. The self-care abilities being trained ranged widely, from mindful-ness, to regulatory skills, to cognitive restructuring or reappraisal. The mechanism and interaction dimensions used to teach these capabilities also vary. For example, gaming and storytelling were used in works such as [48] but with the aim of teaching students how to identify irrational and automatic thoughts, while other in-terventions use modalities such as VR to help people learn the skill of (and enact) cognitive reappraisal skills [65]. Training was thus broader than presenting didactic material but instead also included technology that provided rehearsal or feedback [122, 137]. Technol-ogy thus takes on a pedagogical role in mediating care by building knowledge [11, 183]. Naturally, an intervention encodes a view of which capabilities are relevant to competent self-care and how those capabilities should be performed. This authority has histori-cally sat with clinicians and evidence-based frameworks; however, technological interventions may encode these frameworks within their design. Overall, the self is not simply something to care for, but rather something that can be taught to care for itself. 

5.3.1 Function of Technology. The dominant function that tech-nology filled was directly educating about a skill , including infor-mational support (n=13). These systems explained therapeutic con-cepts, modeled a technique, and provided instructional content. Other papers guided users through exercises or behaviors step-by-step. Such guidance supported Training Self-Care Skills when aimed at developing a capability for subsequent use, and Facilitat-ing Action when aimed at just prompting or supporting an action (Section 5.4); papers could receive both orientations if both care logics were central. This orientation also often overlapped with Making the Self Tangible when interventions translated signals like breathing into a visible form that could also be manipulated by trained exercises (e.g., deep breathing). 

## 5.4 Orientation 4: Facilitating Action 

> “enables children to set their own task goals, receive reminders about these goals, implement them, and confirm their progress ”[107]

While the self has goals and ideals, acting out behaviors to reach these goals may require support and reminders [33, 45]. In other words, the self is an intentional agent whose goals may not be achieved through desired or direct actions without mediated care. In interventions that rely on Facilitating Action , technology provides an external agent of care by directing the user toward executing an action; therefore, people care for themselves by actually externaliz-ing part of the self’s executive function to technology. Interventions in this category varied in who established the de-sired action. For example, the user may define desired actions and the intervention serves to remind the user to execute those actions [40, 107], or responsibility lies in the intervention designers or sys-tem recommendations to predefine beneficial behaviors [125]. In either direction, though, the system determines moments that war-rant action and the means by which those actions are triggered as desirable response. Care therefore targets the gap between wanting or intending and enacting .

5.4.1 Function of Technology. Interventions in Facilitating Action 

address a gap between intention and enactment by notifying or nudging users towards some action (n=9) and guiding users through a practice step-by-step (n=3). This nudging can occur through re-minders, goal structuring, and behavioral recommendation. Interventions that addressed Facilitating Action often also ad-dressed other orientations; it is relatively rare for a contribution to be solely focused on notification or nudging without also in-volving other aspects – such as quantification – to guide that no-tification or training as the end goal. For example, Home Sweet Office periodically prompted online workers to complete one of 160 stress-management activities [158], StressShoe inferred stress from foot movement to then trigger user-defined interventions [40], and 

CounterStress helped users view stress data and imagine alternative behaviors in order to nudge users towards alternative coping habits [57]. In all cases, technology actively forwarded the user toward a behavioral action. Quantifying The Self and Facilitating Action of-ten overlapped, forming a loop in which recorded or inferred states CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

are surfaced but also guide a prompted intervention to address inferred mental health states. 

## 5.5 Orientation 5: Enacting Social Care 

> “an in-depth study on how LLM-driven agents, with their con-textual awareness, understanding, and generation capabilities, can influence self-disclosure in older adults. ” [47]

While our review is focused on self-care interventions, the self is not necessarily always conceived as a lone individual; instead, as theories establish [16, 96], the self has fundamentally social and relational aspects, and requires care to its aspects of connection, belonging, and social roles. Therefore, interventions oriented to-wards Enacting Social Care focus on the assumption that people’s social instincts are core to their mental health. This orientation complicates a classic individual understanding of self-care; while the user remains the initiator and central actor in the self-care prac-tice, the care itself draws upon relational resources and addresses a self shaped through interactions and relationships, or social actions; relational experiences are relevant to self-care even when another person is not directly involved. Note, though, that this orientation should be interpreted in relation to our eligibility criteria, which excluded care dependent on active human co-regulation. 

5.5.1 Function of Technology. Interventions achieved caring for the ‘social’ part of self through relational interaction. However, since we exclude papers reliant on co-regulation, almost all interventions in this orientation focused on simulation and mimicry of people and social behaviors . The prominence of simulated interaction within this orientation should be understood in relation to our eligibility criteria, which exclude care dependent on another person’s active co-regulation. Within this scope, these interventions position social interaction as a care mechanism through technology but don’t require another person’s availability [4]. This finding reveals how designers incorporate relational forms of support into independent, self-directed interventions. 

## 5.6 Orientation 6: Attending to Affective Experience 

> “people will engage in physically comforting activities (e.g., cuddling) with a home companion robot...and will provide care. ”[111]

People care for their felt experience with interventions in Attend-ing to Affective Experience , seeking to soothe or alter how they feel in the moment. Unlike orientations in which users seek to under-stand themselves or train a capability, the interaction itself becomes the resource through which the person attends to an immediate af-fective need. Technology supplies sensory or interactive conditions for comfort, while the user initiates, receives, and regulates their en-gagement with that experience. While all self-care, in some form, is about making the user feel better, interventions in this orientation tend to deliver immediate emotional experience, and interacting or selecting these interventions is itself the direct and primary act of care that a user chooses for helping themselves. For example, 

SnuggleBot used a social robot that combined warmth, softness, and movement to provide physical comfort through cuddling [111]. HCI has a longstanding engagement with affect and experience-centered design [89, 116]. Affective interaction research has chal-lenged an informational model of the self by emphasizing emotion as subjective, embodied, and produced through interaction [18]. Overall, this orientation relies on systems to give care in the most direct, immediate manner and directly shapes the user’s affect. 

5.6.1 Functions of Technology. The two dominant functions di-rectly reflected the theme’s affective mechanism. Five papers di-rectly regulated the user – for example, by delivering soothing sen-sory stimulation – and five evoked an emotion or memory through mediation like music. The boundary of this orientation therefore depends on the role that affect and the directness of care plays. Unlike Quantifying the Self , where affect becomes information about the self, or Mak-ing the Self Tangible , where internal experience is externalized for reflection, this orientation treats the experience itself as the object of care. An emotion tracker treats affect as information to be made knowable, while a metaphorical representation may make an emotion interpretable. An affective intervention, by contrast, has technology assuming the role of delivering comfort as the affective medium. 

## 5.7 Summary and Reflection on the Six Orientations 

While mental health and self-care technology can be defined by modality, population, therapeutic approach, and activity [2, 49, 156], interventions across these factors may also share assumptions of “who” the self is to be cared for and what technology’s role is in enacting care. The above orientations instead connect an interven-tion’s observable functions to an underlying care logic regarding what part of the self is consequential and what change is understood as care. This common structure makes it possible to compare inter-ventions that appear technically similar but enact different forms of care, as well as interventions that appear technically different but address care and authority in similar ways. These orientations are distinct but not mutually exclusive; over-laps show how interventions configure several kinds of technologi-cal care work. The lens that this framework offers can be illustrated through examples. DMHIs for journaling, for example, may appear similar – all presumably enable users to write and express their thoughts or emotions. However, our presented orientations instead distinguish interventions according to how technological media-tion enacts care. A journaling system that provides an open written space is a user-mediated transformation within Making the Self Tangible , but a system that also aggregates entries to show pat-terns is Quantifying the Self . Another intervention might guide the user through their writing, such as through cognitive restructuring 

Training Self-Care Skills . A second group of examples is biofeedback interventions using heart rate signals for self-care [134]. Systems that transform these signals into interactive representations for the user to make meaning of are Making the Self Tangible , but those that use these measurements to trigger recommendations are Facili-tating Action . A third example are virtual and conversational agents Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Embodied virtual coach guides the user 

> through learning self-soothing exercises as
> the user's heart rate is monitored and
> visualized to better interpret.
> App that tracks and infers user movement,
> rest, and other behavioral data throughout
> the day; at night, the user journals to
> express self-compassion, gratitude, and
> reflection based on prompts generated
> from tracked data.
> A mobile app where users self-track
> their emotions & activities; the app
> notifies of activity suggestions when
> emotions are negative.

Figure 5: Examples of papers that touched on frequently overlapping orientations. 

[75]. While interface can appear similar, a conversational agent that helps the user practice and build a skill such as through virtual coaching ( Training Self-Care Skills ) carries distinct assumptions of caring for the self from one that socializes with the user ( Enacting Social Care ) or offers direct comfort ( Attending to the Affective Experience ). Consequently, our presented six orientations offer a new lens to view self-care technology, through the relationship between assumptions of self , the care operation by technology, and the technological functions that enable that care. 

## 6 Discussion 

Through our analysis of 91 SIGCHI papers published over ten years regarding interventions for mental health self-care, we discovered distinct design and analytic layers of mapping self-care interven-tions: for whom and for what needs they are designed (Section 4.2, Section 4.3), what the user does (Section 4.4), what contribution the intervention addresses (Section 4.5), and with what assumptions (Sec-tion 5). This layered account offers a vocabulary for positioning and evaluating future interventions in mental health self-care. Taken together, our work shows key design decisions that can serve to re-distribute care work among users, systems, and designers (Section 4.5) and different relationships between self, care, and technology in self-care interventions (Section 5). Below, we discuss implica-tions for aligning design and evaluation with care assumptions, supporting agency and responsibility in self-care, and implications for situating HCI intervention bounds when addressing “general” users. 

## 6.1 Moving Towards Orientations of Care in Positioning HCI Self-Care Interventions 

The six orientations offer a lens for researchers to position their work through the underlying accounts of how technology is ex-pected to enact care. Making this account explicit clarifies an in-tervention’s theory of care, i.e., the sequence of assumptions con-necting an interaction with a system to a user’s anticipated mental health benefit. As reviewed, orientations cut across activity and technical approach, and instead ask what aspects of self that a user seeks care for and what care constitutes. Surfacing care logic in this way can help align evaluation with in-tervention intent. Usability and acceptability, commonly evaluated in mental health technology research [24, 52], do not necessarily align with the aspect of the self that a user aims to care for and how technology is expected to meet those goals (e.g., learning and applying subsequent skills for Training Self-Care Skills ). These dis-tinct orientations and evaluation needs naturally require distinct forms of evidence. For example, evaluating Quantifying the Self 

may require examining whether the knowledge users derive from system representations is meaningful and appropriately grounded; for Training Self-Care Skills , evaluation might examine whether users can apply learned skills beyond the intervention; and for At-tending to Affective Experience , immediate changes in affect may be most relevant. The six orientations can also support generative reflection for researchers, as choice of an intervention’s technology functions should align with underlying definitions of care and aspects of self to care for (Table 4). However, we acknowledge that our orientations are a first step from the existing corpus, and new orientations may also emerge in the future. The orientations can also help researchers CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

examine how similar technologies enact different forms of care. A journaling intervention, for example, might support expression through Making the Self Tangible , derive patterns through Quanti-fying the Self , or guide cognitive restructuring through Training Self-Care Skills . Choosing among these functions changes both the anticipated benefit and technology’s role in producing it. Re-searchers can therefore use the orientations to ask whether adding a function supports the intended care or introduces a different care logic that requires justification. When an intervention combines orientations, articulating their relationship can clarify whether they complement one another or introduce tensions, such as between meaning-making and datafication of the self. Overall, these orien-tations offer sensitizing concepts for articulating and examining deliberate choices about the care an intervention provides. 

## 6.2 Agency and Responsibility in Self-Care Technology 

Our findings in Section 4.5 highlighted how self-care interventions can reconfigure responsibilities. As papers in our corpus focused on expanding access to underserved populations, promoting sustained engagement for adherence, and translating existing practices into more accessible forms, these all served as a type of response to gaps in conventional mental health resources [4, 112, 135, 170]. These interventions can redistribute work otherwise shared among individuals, professionals, and support networks, placing greater demands on users and embedding some care decisions in system design [99, 100, 139]. Consequently, self-care technology relies on users to be active , responsible , and technically competent [106]. As articulated by Mol’s work on patient choice, giving users independent access to health interventions can create a ‘logic of choice’ that positions users as responsible for appropriate action and any downstream effects from that choice, while ‘logic of care’ is instead a design for the ongoing, continuously changing practice of care [95]. Our work that surfaces how self-care interventions recon-figure responsibility inherently leads to implications on whether interventions offer logic of choice versus logic of care implications for users, and whether users are supported by shared responsibility and responsiveness [95]. We connect this idea to an example from our corpus, where 36.3% of papers contributed self-care interven-tions aimed at improving engagement and sustained adherence to mental health interventions (Section 4.5.2). In conventional care, sustaining participation and adapting care often involves ongoing relational work, e.g., noticing changes, interpreting disengagement, renegotiating goals, and adjusting practices [101]. Self-care inter-ventions redistribute parts of this work into technology features (e.g., reminders, motivational features) but leaves much of it up to the user – not only to initiate and engage in an intervention, but at times even to manually configure the treatment intervention itself (Section 4.5.2). Similarly, discontinued use – a common barrier cited as limiting effectiveness of DMHIs – can be interpreted primarily as a user’s failure to adhere to an available intervention (‘logic of choice’), or evidence that the care support requires fundamental adjustment (‘logic of care’) [39, 50, 101]. Because of reconfiguring responsibilities, self-care technology can thus make users bear both risk of harm from ill-fit interven-tions and blame for failing to manage their care [21, 130]. However, while users are active participants in their self-care, this still occurs within conditions structured by an intervention and its designers. For example, systems that transform inner experience into exter-nal representations hold implicit governance over how to surface signals and its effects, and systems that teach self-care skills can assume pedagogical authority (Section 5). Conventional care re-sources also enforce conditions and make consequential judgments; however, self-care technology can be portrayed as more agentic for the user while operating outside contexts in which care decisions can be more fundamentally updated. Thus, technological responsi-bility can be less accountable, visible, and malleable [99]. This is an echo of Nissenbaum’s work from 1997 (which we now apply to the self-care context) that technological mediation means that people are simultaneously “ assured of answerability ” when the reality is “an obscuring of lines of accountability” [99]. Given this, we want to surface in this work that self-care interven-tions can be user-directed but not necessarily user-centered . Beyond explicitly designing for aspects of self, care, and technology’s role (as in Section 5), designers may also consider how an intervention performs ongoing ‘logic of care’ and the degree of true user agency. This can be closely tied to an orientation – e.g., for Quantifying the Self , resistance may be tied to both recording and surfacing of data such as being able to question or alter interpretations – so our work may be a helpful initial step in this direction. Thus, the goal is to acknowledge that expanding user agency by turning care interven-tions into self-directed, self-initiated practices is also accompanied by designing for the new relations and obligations through which care now becomes possible. Researchers should engage in iterative reflection during intervention development on what “responsibili-ties” are required (i.e., users needing to recognize needs, interpret outputs, evaluate recommendations, sustain engagement) and how the design supports them. Designs might support variable capacity through adjustable levels of guidance, opportunities to revise or contest system interpretations, involvement of trusted others, and pathways to other resources. The appropriate support will depend on the intervention’s orientation and intended context. Relatedly, reporting dropout, refusal, and discontinued use is helpful as evi-dence about the relationship between a person and an intervention. Since one of the biggest barriers to self-care interventions is dropout [12], transparent acknowledgement can aid in understanding un-met accessibility needs or excessive self-management demands in intervention design and evaluation. 

## 6.3 Reconsidering the “General” User 

47.3% of papers in our corpus either explicitly described their intended users as a “general population” or did not establish a population-specific boundary based on any health, demographic, social, or other characteristic. We group these papers descriptively but also distinguish the consequences of broad targeting and un-specified scope below. As reviewed in Section 4.2, papers coded as “general popula-tion” often excluded participants in their study based on clinical symptoms, diagnoses, therapy involvement, or medication, or did not report enough information to definitively determine whether mental health conditions was part of inclusion/exclusion criteria. In a domain such as mental health where well-being moves along Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

a continuum between healthy, distressed, and recovery [59, 112], and at a time when over a billion people worldwide currently live with a mental health disorder [135], exclusion constructs a paradox-ical general user. Some papers in our corpus also excluded people who have prior diagnosis or treatment, but half of all people are expected to experience a mental health disorder in their lifetime [135]. As a result, this evaluation then represents only a narrow portion of the stated population. For papers that do not specify enough information on target user population or participant health criteria, it is then difficult to infer the intervention’s evidentiary boundaries; however, mental health interventions require some account of whom they are designed to support and under what conditions they can be used safely. A common rationale for restricting participation in self-care interventions is to protect participants when researchers cannot provide clinical oversight, especially since there are known harms possible in mental health or care technology [70, 167]. While we can appreciate this, we also identify two problems with this rationale. First, exclusion shifts rather than resolves uncertainty. Exclusion is the field’s primary safety strategy [154], but there are ethical risks in excluding people with moderate or severe symptoms from digital mental health research [87]; namely, this constrains ecologi-cal validity and leaves safety least understood for people who may nevertheless encounter the technology, most in-need of alternative resources, and have particular design needs and considerations that HCI methods could well address [15, 154, 157]. This tension is especially consequential for self-care interventions, which is often justified precisely by their availability outside formal care and with-out continuous oversight (see Section 4.5.1). In some cases, papers do not define any intended population, which also limits shared understanding for the applicability of the research. Second, the 

normalization of this exclusion in HCI mental health interventions forms a consequential construction of the “general” or “healthy” user. Exclusion along these lines can position help-seeking and diagnosis as evidence of a far more nuanced and changing men-tal state, risk further stigma by using help-seeking behaviors as evidence of “illness” that interventions avoid evaluation on, and collapses people into binary distinction of mentally healthy vs. un-healthy. This pattern reveals an implicit model of a person who can partake in technologically mediated self-care, counterintuitively to the framing of self-care in many of these works as valuable for being wholly accessible. Beyond being responsible and active (Section 6.2), the user is also imagined as sufficiently stable , self-aware , and resourced to perform self-care work. This echoes critiques of DMHIs that frame distress as universal while representing a narrow and privileged version of ‘everyone’ [110]. Our findings in Section 4 also reflect elements of this as – beyond user – HCI may also form implicit judgment on which mental health experiences are a problem of ‘everyone’ and which continue to be medicalized (e.g., anxiety, Section 4.3). For future mental health self-care research, we suggest that re-searchers provide an account of an intervention’s intended range and evidentiary boundaries. This includes mental health inclu-sion/exclusion for target population, recruitment population, and analyzed sample, and reporting diagnosis, treatment status, or symp-tom severity as part of participant screening to give context to their perspectives, without excluding them entirely. Screening partici-pants for mental health experience can help us understand mental health status as a variable to consider intervention effects, but stud-ies should include people along the spectrum of symptoms if the intervention is meant to be applied as such. Self-care capacity and needs also can change over time; interventions then need to explic-itly dictate conditions under which an intervention is appropriate, rather than presume static mental health states. 

## 6.4 Limitations 

This review has several limitations. First, we searched selected ACM HCI venues and TOCHI rather than broader digital health litera-ture. Our findings therefore characterize how self-care has been designed and discussed only within the HCI and SIGCHI corpus. Venues in medical informatics and digital psychiatry are likely to address patient populations and define scope of their interventions, for example, and may not be subject to our discussion on general population framing. Thus, our findings in this work are best read as a pattern of HCI ’s approach to self-care rather than self-care technology literature as a whole. Similarly, this review is restricted in scope to English-language work. Second, our search strategy operationalized the review’s scope through papers that positioned themselves as addressing mental (or psychological and/or emo-tional) health in their titles, abstracts, or keywords. Consequently, the corpus may not include interventions addressing more spe-cific experiences when authors did not situate that work explicitly within mental health or well-being. However, forward and back-ward citation searching helps to mitigate this risk. Third, relevant papers did not consistently identify their work as “self-care.” Al-though our eligibility criteria were grounded in prior definitions and refined through team discussion, determining whether an in-tervention was sufficiently user-initiated and self-directed required interpretation. The six orientations are likewise an interpretive synthesis rather than categories explicitly named by paper authors. They are intended as a useful analytic vocabulary, not an exhaustive ontology. Lastly, we acknowledge that the orientation framework in Section 5 emerged during analysis rather than in the original preregistration. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we conducted a scoping review of 91 SIGCHI papers on HCI interventions for mental health self-care published over the last decade. We identified five themes of user populations that interventions are designed for, 12 mental health topics that inter-ventions target, and 13 types of self-care activities presented in our corpus’ interventions. Additionally, we presented an emergent framework outlining six orientations in how HCI positions self-care interventions, which each outline assumptions on the aspect of self that people require care for, what care constitutes, and the role that technology plays to support care. Lastly, we discussed how our work provides a layered vocabulary to position future work, and implications for the redistribution of agency and responsibility for users in self-care interventions. 

## References 

> [1] Elena Agapie, Ravi Karkar, Tricia Aung, Eleanor R. Burgess, Munyaradzi Joel Chinguwa, Andrea K Graham, Predrag Klasnja, Aaron Lyon, Terika McCall,

CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

Sean A. Munson, Francisco Nunes, and Katie Osterhage. 2024. Conducting Research at the Intersection of HCI and Health: Building and Supporting Teams with Diverse Expertise to Increase Public Health Impact. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 463, 6 pages. doi:10.1145/3613905.3636298 [2] Arfan Ahmed, Nashva Ali, Anna Giannicchi, Alaa A Abd-alrazaq, Mohamed Ali Siddig Ahmed, Sarah Aziz, and Mowafa Househ. 2021. Mobile applications for mental health self-care: A scoping review. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine Update 1 (2021), 100041. [3] Sarah Aldaweesh, Ghzal Alelsheikh, Falwah Alhamed, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2026. ”It Hasn’t Lived in Our Society”: Investigating Cultural Sensitivity in LLM Chatbots for Emotional Support. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [4] Laura Helena Andrade, Jordi Alonso, Zeina Mneimneh, J Elizabeth Wells, Ali Al-Hamzawi, Guilherme Borges, Evelyn Bromet, Ronny Bruffaerts, Giovanni De Girolamo, Ron De Graaf, et al. 2014. Barriers to mental health treatment: results from the WHO World Mental Health surveys. Psychological medicine 44, 6 (2014), 1303–1317. [5] Robin Angelini, Katta Spiel, and Maartje De Meulder. 2025. Speculating deaf tech: Reimagining technologies centering deaf people. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–18. [6] Alissa N Antle, Elgin Skye McLaren, Holly Fiedler, and Naomi Johnson. 2019. Design for mental health: How socio-technological processes mediate outcome measures in a field study of a wearable anxiety app. In Proceedings of the thir-teenth international conference on tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction .87–96. [7] Alissa N Antle, Elgin-Skye McLaren, Holly Fiedler, and Naomi Johnson. 2019. Evaluating the impact of a mobile neurofeedback app for young children at school and home. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [8] Hilary Arksey and Lisa O’malley. 2005. Scoping studies: towards a methodolog-ical framework. International journal of social research methodology 8, 1 (2005), 19–32. [9] Ignacio Avellino, Pei-Yi Kuo, Pin Sym Foong, Jason Wiese, Helena M Mentis, Sean A Munson, James R Wallace, Aneesha Singh, Andrew D Miller, Daniel A Epstein, et al. 2025. Envisioning the Future of Interactive Health. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–5. [10] Luke Balcombe and Diego De Leo. 2022. Human-computer interaction in digital mental health.. In Informatics , Vol. 9. [11] Albert Bandura. 1982. Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American psychologist 37, 2 (1982), 122. [12] Rosa Mª Baños, Rocío Herrero, and Mª Dolores Vara. 2022. What is the current and future status of digital mental health interventions? The Spanish Journal of Psychology 25 (2022), e5. [13] Matthew Barker-Canler, Daniel Gooch, Janet van der Linden, and Marian Petre. 2024. Flexible Minimalist Self-Tracking to Support Individual Reflection. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 3 (2024), 1–35. doi:10.1145/ 3660339 [14] Ananya Bhattacharjee, Joseph Jay Williams, Jonah Meyerhoff, Harsh Kumar, Alex Mariakakis, and Rachel Kornfield. 2023. Investigating the Role of Context in the Delivery of Text Messages for Supporting Psychological Wellbeing. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .doi:10.1145/3544548.3580774 [15] Bruno Biagianti, Diego Hidalgo-Mazzei, and Nicholas Meyer. 2017. Developing digital interventions for people living with serious mental illness: perspectives from three mHealth studies. Evidence Based Mental Health 20, 4 (2017), 98–101. [16] Timothy W Bickmore and Rosalind W Picard. 2005. Establishing and maintain-ing long-term human-computer relationships. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 2 (2005), 293–327. [17] Susanne Bødker. 2006. When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges. In 

Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction: changing roles . 1–8. [18] Kirsten Boehner, Rogério DePaula, Paul Dourish, and Phoebe Sengers. 2005. Affect: from information to interaction. In Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical computing: between sense and sensibility . 59–68. [19] Robert Bowman, Camille Nadal, Kellie Morrissey, Anja Thieme, and Gavin Doherty. 2023. Using thematic analysis in healthcare HCI at CHI: A scoping review. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–18. [20] Aurora H Brinkman, Gianna Rea-Sandin, Emily M Lund, Olivia M Fitzpatrick, Michaela S Gusman, and Cassandra L Boness. 2023. Shifting the discourse on disability: Moving to an inclusive, intersectional focus. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 93, 1 (2023), 50. [21] Rebecca CH Brown, Hannah Maslen, and Julian Savulescu. 2019. Against moral responsibilisation of health: Prudential responsibility and health promotion. 

Public Health Ethics 12, 2 (2019), 114–129. [22] Isobel Butorac, Roisin Mcnaney, Jacob Thomas, Alexa Flores-Herrera, Joshua Paulo Seguin, Jaimie C. Northam, and Adrian Carter. 2026. A Queer Future for Digital Mental Health: LGBTQ+ young adult perspectives on engaging with digital mental health tools. ACM Trans. Comput. Healthcare (April 2026). doi:10.1145/3805040 Just Accepted. [23] Wanling Cai, Yucheng Jin, Xianglin Zhao, and Li Chen. 2023. “Listen to Music, Listen to Yourself”: Design of a Conversational Agent to Support Self-Awareness While Listening to Music. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . doi:10.1145/3544548.3581427 [24] Julianna Catania, Steph Beaver, Rakshitha S Kamath, Emma Worthington, Minyi Lu, Hema Gandhi, Heidi C Waters, and Daniel C Malone. 2024. Evaluation of digital mental health technologies in the United States: systematic literature review and framework synthesis. JMIR mental health 11, 1 (2024), e57401. [25] Carl Cederström and André Spicer. 2015. The wellness syndrome . John Wiley & Sons. [26] Shruti Chandra, Devasena Pasupuleti, Gerardo Chavez Castaneda, Charlie Zheng, Priyank Avijeet, Mike J. Dixon, and Kerstin Dautenhahn. 2026. “Tech” a Deep Breath: Technology-guided Breathing Practise With or Without a Social Robot for Psychological and Emotional Well-Being. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–27. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790706 [27] Aishwarya Chandrasekaran, London Bielicke, Diya Shah, Harisha Janakiraman, and Matthew Louis Mauriello. 2025. "I spent 14 hours debugging just one assignment": Toward Computer-Mediated Personal Informatics for Computer Science Student Mental Health. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 711, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598. 3713269 [28] Ryuhaerang Choi, Taehan Kim, Subin Park, Jennifer G. Kim, and Sung-Ju Lee. 2025. Private Yet Social: How LLM Chatbots Support and Challenge Eating Disorder Recovery. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 642, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713485 [29] Youjin Choi, JinYoung Yoo, JaeYoung Moon, Yoonjae Kim, Eun Young Lee, Jennifer G Kim, and Jin-Hyuk Hong. 2026. From Daily Song to Daily Self: Supporting Emotional Growth of Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Individuals through Generative AI Songwriting. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–26. [30] Kevin Chow, Thomas Fritz, Liisa Holsti, Skye Barbic, and Joanna McGrenere. 2023. Feeling Stressed and Unproductive? A Field Evaluation of a Therapy-Inspired Digital Intervention for Knowledge Workers. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 31, 1 (2023). doi:10.1145/3609330 [31] Victoria Clarke and Virginia Braun. 2017. Thematic analysis. The journal of positive psychology 12, 3 (2017), 297–298. [32] Christopher Collins, Simone Arbour, Nathan Beals, Shawn Yama, Jennifer Laffier, and Zixin Zhao. 2022. Covid connect: Chat-driven anonymous story-sharing for peer support. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 301–318. [33] Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian E. Smith, and James A. Landay. 2006. Design Requirements for Technologies that Encourage Physical Activity. In 

Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .ACM, 457–466. doi:10.1145/1124772.1124840 [34] David Coyle, Gavin Doherty, Mark Matthews, and John Sharry. 2007. Computers in talk-based mental health interventions. Interacting with computers 19, 4 (2007), 545–562. [35] Robert Crawford. 1980. Healthism and the medicalization of everyday life. 

International journal of health services 10, 3 (1980), 365–388. [36] Fernanda M. De La Torre, Javier Hernandez, Andrew D. Wilson, and Judith Amores. 2025. Sonora: Human-AI Co-Creation of 3D Audio Worlds and its Impact on Anxiety and Cognitive Load. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . doi:10.1145/3706598.3713316 [37] Kevin Doherty, José Marcano-Belisario, Martin Cohn, Nikolaos Mastellos, Cecily Morrison, Josip Car, and Gavin Doherty. 2019. Engagement with mental health screening on mobile devices: Results from an antenatal feasibility study. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–15. [38] Paul Dourish. 2001. Where the action is: the foundations of embodied interaction .MIT press. [39] Madeleine Clare Elish. 2019. Moral crumple zones: Cautionary tales in human-robot interaction (pre-print). Engaging Science, Technology, and Society (pre-print) 

(2019). [40] Don Samitha Elvitigala, Philipp M Scholl, Hussel Suriyaarachchi, Vipula Dis-sanayake, and Suranga Nanayakkara. 2021. StressShoe: a DIY toolkit for just-in-time personalised stress interventions for office workers performing seden-tary tasks. In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on mobile human-computer interaction . 1–14. [41] Daniel A Epstein, Aisling Ann O’Kane, and Andrew D Miller. 2023. Symposium: Workgroup on interactive systems in healthcare (WISH). In Extended Abstracts Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–4. [42] Anna Fang, Hriday Chhabria, Alekhya Maram, and Haiyi Zhu. 2025. Social simulation for everyday self-care: Design insights from leveraging VR, AR, and LLMs for practicing stress relief. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–23. [43] Alexz Farrall, Adwait Sharma, Ben Ainsworth, Pamela Jacobsen, and Jason Alexander. 2026. Encouraging Breath: Increasing Out-of-Session DMHI En-gagement using a Shape-Changing Biofeedback Physicalization within a Lon-gitudinal RCT. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1024, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790933 [44] Alexz Farrall, Jordan Taylor, Ben Ainsworth, and Jason Alexander. 2023. Man-ifesting Breath: Empirical Evidence for the Integration of Shape-changing Biofeedback-based Artefacts within Digital Mental Health Interventions. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 497, 14 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581188 [45] B. J. Fogg. 2003. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do . Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA. doi:10.1016/B978-1-55860-643-2.X5000-8 [46] Christina M Godfrey, Margaret B Harrison, Rosemary Lysaght, Marianne Lamb, Ian D Graham, and Patricia Oakley. 2011. Care of self–care by other–care of other: The meaning of self-care from research, practice, policy and industry perspectives. International Journal of Evidence-Based Healthcare 9, 1 (2011), 3–24. [47] Yijie Guo, Ruhan Wang, Zhenhan Huang, Tongtong Jin, Xiwen Yao, Yuan-Ling Feng, Weiwei Zhang, Yuan Yao, and Haipeng Mi. 2025. Exploring the design of LLM-based agent in enhancing self-disclosure among the older adults. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–17. [48] Aleesha Hamid, Rabiah Arshad, and Suleman Shahid. 2022. What are you thinking?: Using CBT and storytelling to improve mental health among col-lege students. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–16. [49] Negin Hashmati, Therése Skoog, Mohammad Obaid, and Thommy Eriksson. 2026. Friend or Therapist? A Systematic Literature Review on Chatbots and Mental Health in Young People. In Proceedings of the 1st International Confer-ence on Human-Computer Interaction in the Alps (AlpCHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 56–64. doi:10.1145/3780045.3780052 [50] Adam O Horvath and Lester Luborsky. 1993. The role of the therapeutic alliance in psychotherapy. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 61, 4 (1993), 561. [51] Yun Huang, Ying Tang, and Yang Wang. 2015. Emotion map: A location-based mobile social system for improving emotion awareness and regulation. In Pro-ceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 130–142. [52] Yavuz Inal, Jo Dugstad Wake, Frode Guribye, and Tine Nordgreen. 2020. Usability evaluations of mobile mental health technologies: systematic review. Journal of medical Internet research 22, 1 (2020), e15337. [53] Becky Inkster, Shubhankar Sarda, and Vinod Subramanian. 2018. An Empathy-Driven, Conversational Artificial Intelligence Agent (Wysa) for Digital Mental Well-Being: Real-World Data Evaluation Mixed-Methods Study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 6, 11 (2018), e12106. doi:10.2196/12106 [54] Smriti Jha, Gerry Chan, Seana Jewer, Vincent I.O. Agyapong, and Rita Orji. 2025. “Bring them back to life”: LifeLink Application for Caregivers Dealing with Suicidality. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 512, 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713699 [55] Yucheng Jin, Wanling Cai, Li Chen, Yizhe Zhang, Gavin Doherty, and Tonglin Jiang. 2024. Exploring the design of generative AI in supporting music-based reminiscence for older adults. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [56] Yuting Jin, Tingting Wang, Dantong Qin, Zhibin Zhou, Mengkun Bi, Min Hua, and Pan Wang. 2026. MIRA: A Human-AI Co-Creation Agent for Self-reflection through Squiggle Game. In Proceedings of the 2026 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2972–2987. doi:10.1145/3800645.3813019 [57] Gyuwon Jung and Uichin Lee. 2025. CounterStress: Enhancing Stress Coping Planning through Counterfactual Explanations in Personal Informatics. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 714, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713730 [58] Gyuwon Jung, Sangjun Park, and Uichin Lee. 2024. DeepStress: Supporting Stressful Context Sensemaking in Personal Informatics Systems Using a Quasi-experimental Approach. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1000, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3613904.3642766 [59] Corey LM Keyes. 2002. The mental health continuum: From languishing to flourishing in life. Journal of health and social behavior (2002), 207–222. [60] Ilona Kickbusch. 1989. Self-care in health promotion. Social Science & Medicine 

29, 2 (1989), 125–130. [61] Bogoan Kim, Sung-In Kim, Sangwon Park, Hee Jeong Yoo, Hwajung Hong, and Kyungsik Han. 2023. Routineaid: Externalizing key design elements to support daily routines of individuals with autism. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–18. [62] Nanum Kim, Sangsu Jang, Hansol Kim, Dayoung Shin, and Young-Woo Park. 2025. Lino: An Interactive System for Daily Mood Recordings Supporting Meaning-Making through Single Stroke Drawing Approach. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 2255–2269. doi:10.1145/ 3715336.3735675 [63] Taewan Kim, Seolyeong Bae, Hyun Ah Kim, Su-Woo Lee, Hwajung Hong, Chanmo Yang, and Young-Ho Kim. 2024. MindfulDiary: Harnessing Large Language Model to Support Psychiatric Patients’ Journaling. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 701, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642937 [64] Taewan Kim, Haesoo Kim, Ha Yeon Lee, Hwarang Goh, Shakhboz Abdigapporov, Mingon Jeong, Hyunsung Cho, Kyungsik Han, Youngtae Noh, Sung-Ju Lee, et al. 2022. Prediction for retrospection: Integrating algorithmic stress prediction into personal informatics systems for college students’ mental health. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–20. [65] Alexandra Kitson, Alissa N Antle, and Petr Slovak. 2023. Co-designing a virtual reality intervention for supporting cognitive reappraisal skills development with youth. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM interaction design and children conference . 14–26. [66] Sarah E Knowles, Gill Toms, Caroline Sanders, Penny Bee, Karina Lovell, Stefan Rennick-Egglestone, David Coyle, Catriona M Kennedy, Elizabeth Littlewood, David Kessler, et al. 2014. Qualitative meta-synthesis of user experience of computerised therapy for depression and anxiety. PLoS one 9, 1 (2014), e84323. [67] Kevin Koch, Verena Tiefenbeck, Shu Liu, Thomas Berger, Elgar Fleisch, and Felix Wortmann. 2021. Taking mental health & well-being to the streets: An exploratory evaluation of in-vehicle interventions in the wild. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–15. [68] Artie Konrad, Victoria Bellotti, Nicole Crenshaw, Simon Tucker, Les Nelson, Honglu Du, Peter Pirolli, and Steve Whittaker. 2015. Finding the adaptive sweet spot: Balancing compliance and achievement in automated stress reduction. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3829–3838. [69] Yubo Kou, Xinning Gui, Yunan Chen, and Bonnie Nardi. 2019. Turn to the self in human-computer interaction: care of the self in negotiating the human-technology relationship. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–15. [70] Hannah R Lawrence, Renee A Schneider, Susan B Rubin, Maja J Matarić, Daniel J McDuff, and Megan Jones Bell. 2024. The opportunities and risks of large language models in mental health. JMIR Mental Health 11, 1 (2024), e59479. [71] Kwangyoung Lee and Hwajung Hong. 2017. Designing for self-tracking of emo-tion and experience with tangible modality. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 465–475. [72] Minha Lee, Sander Ackermans, Nena Van As, Hanwen Chang, Enzo Lucas, and Wijnand IJsselsteijn. 2019. Caring for Vincent: a chatbot for self-compassion. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems .1–13. [73] Lowell S Levin and Ellen L Idler. 1983. Self-care in health. Annual review of public health 4, 1 (1983), 181–201. [74] Lowell S Levin, Alfred H Katz, and Erik Holst. 2026. Self-care: Lay initiatives in health . Taylor & Francis. [75] Han Li, Renwen Zhang, Yi-Chieh Lee, Robert E Kraut, and David C Mohr. 2023. Systematic review and meta-analysis of AI-based conversational agents for promoting mental health and well-being. NPJ Digital Medicine 6, 1 (2023), 236. [76] Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-based model of personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 557–566. [77] Yi Li, Xuanxuan Ding, Yifan Chen, Yeye Li, and Nan Ma. 2025. Customizable AI for Depression Care: Improving the User Experience of Large Language Model-Driven Chatbots. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1844–1866. doi:10.1145/3715336.3735795 [78] Yongming Li, Ling Ling, Yunpeng Song, Yun Huang, and Zhongmin Cai. 2026. AReframedChair: Reframing the Empty Chair through Dyadic and Triadic AR-Mediated Self-Embodiment. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1563, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790406 [79] Tony Liu, Bhargavi Patil, Thu Ngo, Chris Karr, Theresa Nguyen, Rachel Korn-field, and Jonah Meyerhoff. 2026. Framing Helper Therapy to Support User Engagement: Causal Evidence from a Public Deployment of a Mental Health CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

Support Text Messaging Program. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 916, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791591 [80] Lian Loke and Thecla Schiphorst. 2018. The somatic turn in human-computer interaction. interactions 25, 5 (2018), 54–5863. [81] Andrés Lucero. 2015. Using affinity diagrams to evaluate interactive prototypes. In IFIP conference on human-computer interaction . Springer, 231–248. [82] Deborah Lupton. 2016. The quantified self . John Wiley & Sons. [83] Susanne Mak and Aliki Thomas. 2022. Steps for conducting a scoping review. 

Journal of graduate medical education 14, 5 (2022), 565–567. [84] Nicole Martínez, Cynthia D Connelly, Alexa Pérez, and Patricia Calero. 2021. Self-care: A concept analysis. International journal of nursing sciences 8, 4 (2021), 418–425. [85] Kayla Matheus, Marynel Vázquez, and Brian Scassellati. 2024. Ommie: The Design and Development of a Social Robot for Anxiety Reduction. ACM Trans-actions on Human-Robot Interaction 14, 2 (2024). doi:10.1145/3706122 [86] Mark Matthews, Stephen Voida, Saeed Abdullah, Gavin Doherty, Tanzeem Choudhury, Sangha Im, and Geri Gay. 2015. In situ design for mental illness: Considering the pathology of bipolar disorder in mhealth design. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services . 86–97. [87] Hugh C McCall, Heather D Hadjistavropoulos, and Lynn Loutzenhiser. 2021. Reconsidering the ethics of exclusion criteria in research on digital mental health interventions. Ethics & Behavior 31, 3 (2021), 171–180. [88] Lucy McCarren, Ulrika Eriksson, Laura Ortiz Mengual, and Sanna Kuoppamäki. 2026. Exploring the Design of a LLM-Based AI Assistant for Mindfulness Practice With Older Adults. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–16. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790734 [89] John McCarthy and Peter Wright. 2007. Technology as experience . MIT press. [90] Dianne McCormack. 2003. An examination of the self-care concept uncovers a new direction for healthcare reform. Nursing Leadership (Toronto, Ont.) 16, 4 (2003), 48–62. [91] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and inter-rater reliability in qualitative research: Norms and guidelines for CSCW and HCI practice. Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–23. [92] Minsol Michelle Kim, Daniel Low, David Lafond, Eugene Shim, Michelle Han, Mohanad Kandil, Chenyu Zhang, Theo Kitsberg, Chelsea Boccagno, Paul Pu Liang, and Pattie Maes. 2026. Breaking Negative Cycles: A Reflection-to-Action System for Adaptive Change. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1438, 22 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791615 [93] Noah Miller, Ekaterina R. Stepanova, John Desnoyers-Stewart, Ashu Adhikari, Alexandra Kitson, Patrick Pennefather, Denise Quesnel, Katharina Brauns, Anika Friedl-Werner, Alexander Stahn, and Bernhard E. Riecke. 2023. Awedyssey: Design Tensions in Eliciting Self-transcendent Emotions in Virtual Reality to Support Mental Well-being and Connection. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (DIS ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 189–211. doi:10.1145/3563657.3595998 [94] Pardis Miri, Mehul Arora, Aman Malhotra, Robert Flory, Stephanie Hu, Ashley Lowber, Ishan Goyal, Jacqueline Nguyen, John P Hegarty, Marlo D Kohn, et al. 2022. FAR: end-to-end vibrotactile distributed system designed to facilitate affect regulation in children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder through slow breathing. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [95] Annemarie Mol. 2008. The logic of care: Health and the problem of patient choice .Routledge. [96] Elizabeth L Murnane, Tara G Walker, Beck Tench, Stephen Voida, and Jaime Snyder. 2018. Personal informatics in interpersonal contexts: towards the design of technology that supports the social ecologies of long-term mental health management. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–27. [97] Subigya Nepal, Arvind Pillai, William Campbell, Talie Massachi, Michael V. Heinz, Ashmita Kunwar, Eunsol Soul Choi, Xuhai Xu, Joanna Kuc, Jeremy F. Huckins, Jason Holden, Sarah M. Preum, Colin Depp, Nicholas Jacobson, Mary P. Czerwinski, Eric Granholm, and Andrew T. Campbell. 2024. MindScape Study: Integrating LLM and Behavioral Sensing for Personalized AI-Driven Journaling Experiences. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 8, 4, Article 186 (Nov. 2024), 44 pages. doi:10.1145/3699761 [98] Sameer Neupane, Mithun Saha, Nasir Ali, Timothy Hnat, Shahin Alan Samiei, Anandatirtha Nandugudi, David M. Almeida, and Santosh Kumar. 2024. Mo-mentary Stressor Logging and Reflective Visualizations: Implications for Stress Management with Wearables. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Associ-ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 809, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642662 [99] Helen Nissenbaum. 1997. Accountability in a computerized society. Human values and the design of computer technology (1997), 41–64. [100] Helen Nissenbaum. 2001. How computer systems embody values. Computer 34, 3 (2001), 120–119. [101] John C Norcross and Bruce E Wampold. 2018. A new therapy for each patient: Evidence-based relationships and responsiveness. Journal of clinical psychology 

74, 11 (2018), 1889–1906. [102] Francisco Nunes, Nervo Verdezoto, Geraldine Fitzpatrick, Morten Kyng, Erik Grönvall, and Cristiano Storni. 2015. Self-care technologies in HCI: Trends, tensions, and opportunities. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 22, 6 (2015), 1–45. [103] Dorothea Elizabeth Orem, Susan G Taylor, and Kathie McLaughlin Renpenning. 1995. Nursing: Concepts of practice. (1995). [104] World Health Organization. 2022. World mental health report: Transforming mental health for all . World Health Organization. [105] World Health Organization et al. 2009. Self-care in the context of primary health care . Technical Report. WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia. [106] Nelly Oudshoorn. 2011. Telecare technologies and the transformation of healthcare .Springer. [107] Doeun Park, Myounglee Choo, Minseo Cho, Jinwoo Kim, and Yee-Jin Shin. 2024. Collaborative School Mental Health System: Leveraging a Conversational Agent for Enhancing Children’s Executive Function. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [108] Joonyoung Park, Hyewon Cho, Hyehyun Chu, YeEun Lee, and Hajin Lim. 2025. NoRe: Augmenting Journaling Experience with Generative AI for Music Cre-ation. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2718–2737. doi:10.1145/3715336.3735845 [109] SoHyun Park, Anja Thieme, Jeongyun Han, Sungwoo Lee, Wonjong Rhee, and Bongwon Suh. 2021. “I wrote as if I were telling a story to someone I knew.”: Designing Chatbot Interactions for Expressive Writing in Mental Health. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 926–941. [110] Lisa Parker, Lisa Bero, Donna Gillies, Melissa Raven, Barbara Mintzes, Jon Jureidini, and Quinn Grundy. 2018. Mental Health Messages in Prominent Mental Health Apps. The Annals of Family Medicine 16, 4 (2018), 338–342. doi:10.1370/afm.2260 [111] Danika Passler Bates, Skyla Y. Dudek, James M. Berzuk, Adriana Lorena González, and James E. Young. 2024. SnuggleBot the Companion: Exploring In-Home Robot Interaction Strategies to Support Coping With Loneliness. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Copen-hagen, Denmark) (DIS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2972–2986. doi:10.1145/3643834.3660702 [112] Vikram Patel, Shekhar Saxena, Crick Lund, Graham Thornicroft, Florence Bain-gana, Paul Bolton, Dan Chisholm, Pamela Y Collins, Janice L Cooper, Julian Eaton, et al. 2018. The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustain-able development. The lancet 392, 10157 (2018), 1553–1598. [113] Johanna Peltola, Kirsikka Kaipainen, Katariina Keinonen, Noona Kiuru, and Markku Turunen. 2023. Developing A Conversational Interface for an ACT-based Online Program: Understanding Adolescents’ Expectations of Conversa-tional Style. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (CUI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3571884.3597142 [114] Sachin R Pendse, Amit Sharma, Aditya Vashistha, Munmun De Choudhury, and Neha Kumar. 2021. “Can I not be suicidal on a Sunday?”: understanding technology-mediated pathways to mental health support. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–16. [115] Adrian Petterson, Jocelyn Mattka, and Priyank Chandra. 2025. Expanding Care Conceptualizations: An Integrative Literature Review of Care in HCI. In 

Proceedings of the ACM SIGCAS/SIGCHI Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies . 481–503. [116] Rosalind W Picard. 1997. Affective computing . The MIT press. [117] Kyrill Potapov and Paul Marshall. 2020. LifeMosaic: co-design of a personal informatics tool for youth. In Proceedings of the interaction design and children conference . 519–531. [118] Courtney Potts, Carmen Kealy, Jamie M McNulty, Alba Madrid-Cagigal, Thomas Wilson, Maurice D Mulvenna, Siobhan O’Neill, Gary Donohoe, and Margaret M Barry. 2025. Digital mental health interventions for young people aged 16-25 years: scoping review. Journal of Medical Internet Research 27 (2025), e72892. [119] Mirjana Prpa, Kıvanç Tatar, Jules Françoise, Bernhard Riecke, Thecla Schiphorst, and Philippe Pasquier. 2018. Attending to breath: exploring how the cues in a virtual environment guide the attention to breath and shape the quality of ex-perience to support mindfulness. In Proceedings of the 2018 designing interactive systems conference . 71–84. [120] Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2020. Mirror ritual: An affective interface for emotional self-reflection. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [121] Julian Rasch, Michelle Johanna Zender, Sophia Sakel, and Nadine Wagener. 2024. Mind mansion: exploring metaphorical interactions to engage with negative Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

thoughts in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 2305–2318. [122] Samira Rasouli, Moojan Ghafurian, and Kerstin Dautenhahn. 2025. Co-Design and User Evaluation of a Robotic Mental Well-Being Coach to Support University Students’ Public Speaking Anxiety. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 32, 3, Article 24 (June 2025), 70 pages. doi:10.1145/3718084 [123] Geoffrey M. Reed, Michael B. First, Charles S. Kogan, Steven E. Hyman, Oye Gureje, Wolfgang Gaebel, Mario Maj, Dan J. Stein, Andreas Maercker, Peter Tyrer, Angélica M. Claudino, Elena Garralda, Luis Salvador-Carulla, Rajiv Ray, Anne M. Lovell, and Shekhar Saxena. 2019. Innovations and changes in the ICD-11 classification of mental, behavioural and neurodevelopmental disorders. 

World Psychiatry 18, 1 (2019), 3–19. doi:10.1002/wps.20611 [124] Barbara Riegel, Sandra B Dunbar, Donna Fitzsimons, Kenneth E Freedland, Christopher S Lee, Sandy Middleton, Anna Stromberg, Ercole Vellone, David E Webber, and Tiny Jaarsma. 2021. Self-care research: where are we now? Where are we going? International journal of nursing studies 116 (2021), 103402. [125] Darius A Rohani, Andrea Quemada Lopategui, Nanna Tuxen, Maria Faurholt-Jepsen, Lars V Kessing, and Jakob E Bardram. 2020. MUBS: A personalized recommender system for behavioral activation in mental health. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [126] Joan Sol Roo, Renaud Gervais, Jeremy Frey, and Martin Hachet. 2017. Inner garden: Connecting inner states to a mixed reality sandbox for mindfulness. In 

Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems .1459–1470. [127] John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and Matthew Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1163–1172. [128] Jonathan Rubin, Hoda Eldardiry, Rui Abreu, Shane Ahern, Honglu Du, Ashish Pattekar, and Daniel G Bobrow. 2015. Towards a mobile and wearable system for predicting panic attacks. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 529–533. [129] Minna Ruckenstein and Natasha Dow Schüll. 2017. The datafication of health. 

Annual review of anthropology 46, 1 (2017), 261–278. [130] Jesse N Ruse, Ernst Schraube, and Paul Rhodes. 2024. Left to their own devices: the significance of mental health apps on the construction of therapy and care: JN Ruse et al. Subjectivity 31, 4 (2024), 410–428. [131] Hyeyoung Ryu, Soyeon Kim, Dain Kim, Sooan Han, Keeheon Lee, and Younah Kang. 2020. Simple and steady interactions win the healthy mentality: designing a chatbot service for the elderly. Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction 4, CSCW2 (2020), 1–25. [132] P Sachdev, G Andrews, MJ Hobbs, M Sunderland, and TM Anderson. 2009. Neurocognitive disorders: Cluster 1 of the proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11: Paper 2 of 7 of the thematic section:‘A proposal for a meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11’. Psychological Medicine 39, 12 (2009), 2001–2012. [133] Sophia Sakel, Tabea Blenk, Albrecht Schmidt, and Luke Haliburton. 2024. The Social Journal: Investigating Technology to Support and Reflect on Meaningful Social Interactions. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . doi:10.1145/3613904.3642411 [134] Pedro Sanches, Axel Janson, Pavel Karpashevich, Camille Nadal, Chengcheng Qu, Claudia Daudén Roquet, Muhammad Umair, Charles Windlin, Gavin Do-herty, Kristina Höök, et al. 2019. HCI and Affective Health: Taking stock of a decade of studies and charting future research directions. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [135] Damian F Santomauro, Paul Anthony Miller, Jamileh Shadid, Sarah Wulf Hanson, Anh Vo, Darius Jake Roy, Hailey Hagins, Ana M Mantilla Herrera, James G Scott, Holly E Erskine, et al. 2026. Updated trends in the global prevalence and burden of mental disorders, 1990–2023: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2023. The Lancet 407, 10543 (2026), 2040–2064. [136] Tanja Schneeberger, Naomi Sauerwein, Manuel S Anglet, and Patrick Gebhard. 2021. Stress management training using biofeedback guided by social agents. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces .564–574. [137] Jessica Schroeder, Chelsey Wilkes, Kael Rowan, Arturo Toledo, Ann Paradiso, Mary Czerwinski, Gloria Mark, and Marsha M Linehan. 2018. Pocket skills: A conversational mobile web app to support dialectical behavioral therapy. In 

Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–15. [138] Natasha Dow Schüll. 2016. Data for life: Wearable technology and the design of self-care. BioSocieties 11, 3 (2016), 317–333. [139] Phoebe Sengers, Kirsten Boehner, Shay David, and Joseph’Jofish’ Kaye. 2005. Reflective design. In Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical com-puting: between sense and sensibility . 49–58. [140] Woosuk Seo, Chanmo Yang, and Young-Ho Kim. 2024. Chacha: leveraging large language models to prompt children to share their emotions about personal events. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [141] Ashish Sharma, Kevin Rushton, Inna Wanyin Lin, Theresa Nguyen, and Tim Althoff. 2024. Facilitating Self-Guided Mental Health Interventions Through Human-Language Model Interaction: A Case Study of Cognitive Restructuring. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 700, 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642761 [142] Will Simm, Maria Angela Ferrario, Adrian Gradinar, Marcia Tavares Smith, Stephen Forshaw, Ian Smith, and Jon Whittle. 2016. Anxiety and autism: towards personalized digital health. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1270–1281. [143] Petr Slovak, Alissa Antle, Nikki Theofanopoulou, Claudia Daudén Roquet, James Gross, and Katherine Isbister. 2023. Designing for emotion regulation interven-tions: an agenda for HCI theory and research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 30, 1 (2023), 1–51. [144] Jose Luis Soler-Dominguez, Samuel Navas-Medrano, and Patricia Pons. 2024. Arcadia: A gamified mixed reality system for emotional regulation and self-compassion. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [145] Inhwa Song, SoHyun Park, Sachin R Pendse, Jessica Lee Schleider, Munmun De Choudhury, and Young-Ho Kim. 2025. ExploreSelf: Fostering User-driven Exploration and Reflection on Personal Challenges with Adaptive Guidance by Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 306, 22 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713883 [146] Valmi D Sousa 1. 2002. Conceptual analysis of self-care agency. (2002). [147] Samantha Speer, Emily Hamner, Michael Tasota, Lauren Zito, and Sarah K Byrne-Houser. 2021. MindfulNest: Strengthening emotion regulation with tangible user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction . 103–111. [148] Micol Spitale, Minja Axelsson, and Hatice Gunes. 2025. VITA: A Multi-Modal LLM-Based System for Longitudinal, Autonomous, and Adaptive Robotic Mental Well-Being Coaching. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction 14, 2 (2025), 1–28. doi:10.1145/3712265 [149] Phoebe A Staab, A. Jess Williams, Mackenzie D. A. Robertson, and Petr Slovak. 2024. “Can you be with that feeling?”: Extending Design Strategies for Intero-ceptive Awareness for the Context of Mental Health. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) 

(CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 695, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3643054 [150] Elizabeth C. Stade, Shannon Wiltsey Stirman, Lyle H. Ungar, Cody L. Boland, H. Andrew Schwartz, David B. Yaden, João Sedoc, Robert J. DeRubeis, Robb Willer, and Johannes C. Eichstaedt. 2024. Large language models could change the future of behavioral healthcare: a proposal for responsible development and evaluation. npj Mental Health Research 3, 1 (2024), 12. doi:10.1038/s44184-024-00056-z [151] Evropi Stefanidi, Marit Bentvelzen, Paweł W. Woźniak, Thomas Kosch, Mikołaj P. Woźniak, Thomas Mildner, Stefan Schneegass, Heiko Müller, and Jasmin Niess. 2023. Literature Reviews in HCI: A Review of Reviews. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) 

(CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 509, 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581332 [152] Xinglin Sun, Caroline Claisse, Runhua Zhang, Xinyu Wu, Jialin Yuan, and Qi Wang. 2025. Conversations with the stressed body: Facilitating stress self-disclosure among adolescent girls through an embodied approach. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 3421–3439. [153] Aishwarya Umeshkumar Surani and Sanchari Das. 2026. Co-designing MESA-Bot: Enhancing Accessibility, Privacy, Security, and Trust in a Mental Health Chatbot for Older Adults. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–21. [154] Rayan Taher, Che-Wei Hsu, Chloe Hampshire, Carolina Fialho, Clare Heaysman, Daniel Stahl, Sukhi Shergill, and Jenny Yiend. 2023. The safety of digital mental health interventions: systematic review and recommendations. JMIR mental health 10, 1 (2023), e47433. [155] Felicia Fang-Yi Tan, Ashwin Ram, Chloe Haigh, and Shengdong Zhao. 2023. Mindful moments: Exploring on-the-go mindfulness practice on smart-glasses. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 476– 492. [156] Anja Thieme, Danielle Belgrave, and Gavin Doherty. 2020. Machine learning in mental health: A systematic review of the HCI literature to support the development of effective and implementable ML systems. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 5 (2020), 1–53. [157] Anja Thieme, John McCarthy, Paula Johnson, Stephanie Phillips, Jayne Wallace, Siân Lindley, Karim Ladha, Daniel Jackson, Diana Nowacka, Ashur Rafiev, et al. 2016. Challenges for designing new technology for health and wellbeing in a complex mental healthcare context. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2136–2149. CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

[158] Xin Tong, Matthew Louis Mauriello, Marco Antonio Mora-Mendoza, Nina Prabhu, Jane Paik Kim, and Pablo E Paredes Castro. 2023. Just Do Some-thing: Comparing Self-proposed and Machine-recommended Stress Interven-tions among Online Workers with Home Sweet Office. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) 

(CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 495, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581319 [159] John Torous, Jake Linardon, Simon B Goldberg, Shufang Sun, Imogen Bell, Jennifer Nicholas, Lamiece Hassan, Yining Hua, Alyssa Milton, and Joseph Firth. 2025. The evolving field of digital mental health: current evidence and implementation issues for smartphone apps, generative artificial intelligence, and virtual reality. World Psychiatry 24, 2 (2025), 156–174. [160] John Torous, Jennifer Nicholas, Mark E Larsen, Joseph Firth, and Helen Chris-tensen. 2018. Clinical review of user engagement with mental health smartphone apps: evidence, theory and improvements. Evidence Based Mental Health 21, 3 (2018), 116–119. [161] Andrea C Tricco, Erin Lillie, Wasifa Zarin, Kelly K O’Brien, Heather Colquhoun, Danielle Levac, David Moher, Micah DJ Peters, Tanya Horsley, Laura Weeks, et al. 2018. PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. Annals of internal medicine 169, 7 (2018), 467–473. [162] Wout Vossen, Maxwell Szymanski, and Katrien Verbert. 2024. The effect of personalizing a psychotherapy conversational agent on therapeutic bond and usage intentions. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 761–771. [163] Nadine Wagener, Arne Kiesewetter, Leon Reicherts, Paweł W. Woźniak, Jo-hannes Schöning, Yvonne Rogers, and Jasmin Niess. 2024. MoodShaper: A Virtual Reality Experience to Support Managing Negative Emotions. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Copenhagen, Denmark) (DIS ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2286–2304. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661570 [164] Nadine Wagener, Jasmin Niess, Yvonne Rogers, and Johannes Schöning. 2022. Mood worlds: A virtual environment for autonomous emotional expression. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–16. [165] Nadine Wagener, Leon Reicherts, Nima Zargham, Natalia Bartłomiejczyk, Ava Elizabeth Scott, Katherine Wang, Marit Bentvelzen, Evropi Stefanidi, Thomas Mildner, Yvonne Rogers, et al. 2023. SelVReflect: A guided VR ex-perience fostering reflection on personal challenges. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [166] Rui Wang, Weichen Wang, Alex daSilva, Jeremy F. Huckins, William M. Kel-ley, Todd F. Heatherton, and Andrew T. Campbell. 2018. Tracking Depression Dynamics in College Students Using Mobile Phone and Wearable Sensing. Pro-ceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 

2, 1 (2018), 43. doi:10.1145/3191777 [167] Tony Wang and Qian Yang. 2026. Care and Capability: How to Temper Excessive Social-Emotional Chatbot Use According to Analogous Professional Practices. (2026). [168] Zixuan Wang, Yuanrong Guo, Eilidh Bowman, Yuxiang Zhai, Xinhuan Shu, Shengchen Zhang, Karey Helms, Tara Capel, and John Vines. 2026. Caring about care: a meta-narrative review of HCI research on care. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–31. [169] Qianjie Wei, Xiaoying Wei, Yiqi Liang, Fan Lin, Nuonan Si, and Mingming Fan. 2025. RemoteChess: Enhancing Older Adults’ Social Connectedness via Designing a Virtual Reality Chinese Chess (Xiangqi) Community. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1128, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714236 [170] WHO. 2025. World mental health today: latest data. [171] Rachel Woo, Daniel Harley, and James R. Wallace. 2024. “I’m not alone in that battle”: Designing Mobile AR for Mental Health Communication and Com-munity Connectedness. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . doi:10.1145/3643834.3661626 [172] World Health Organization. 2024. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Re-quirements for ICD-11 Mental, Behavioural and Neurodevelopmental Disorders .World Health Organization, Geneva. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/ 9789240077263 [173] World Health Organization. 2026. Self-care for Health and Well-being. https:// www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/self-care-health-interventions Ac-cessed August 16, 2026. [174] Mengyuan Wu, Zhihan Jiang, Yuang Fan, Richard Feng, Sahiti Dharmavaram, Mathew Polowitz, Shawn Fallon, Bashima Islam, Lizbeth Benson, Irene Tung, David Creswell, and Xuhai Xu. 2026. MindfulAgents: Personalizing Mindfulness Meditation via an Expert-Aligned Multi-Agent System. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1025, 25 pages. doi:10. 1145/3772318.3791817 [175] Zihan Yan, Yufei Wu, Yang Zhang, and Xiang’Anthony’ Chen. 2022. EmoGlass: An end-to-end AI-enabled wearable platform for enhancing self-awareness of emotional health. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–19. [176] Dong Whi Yoo, Hayoung Woo, Viet Cuong Nguyen, Michael L. Birnbaum, Kaylee Payne Kruzan, Jennifer G Kim, Gregory D. Abowd, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2024. Patient Perspectives on AI-Driven Predictions of Schizophrenia Relapses: Understanding Concerns and Opportunities for Self-Care and Treatment. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 702, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904. 3642369 [177] Bin Yu, Mathias Funk, Jun Hu, and Loe Feijs. 2017. StressTree: A metaphorical visualization for biofeedback-assisted stress management. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on designing interactive systems . 333–337. [178] Jingxin Yu, Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, and Aisling Ann O’Kane. 2025. Creatively Supporting Mental Wellbeing: A Tangible Toolkit to Scaffold Self-Tracking through Mindful Colouring. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Con-ference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction . doi:10.1145/3689050. 3704944 [179] Chuyang Zhang, Bin Yu, Yuchao Wang, Mansi Yuan, Wanqi Wang, Seungwoo Je, and Pengcheng An. 2026. ASafePlace: User-Led Personalization of VR Relaxation via an Art Therapy Activity. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–24. [180] He Zhang, Xinyang Li, Xingyu Zhou, and Xinyi Fu. 2026. VR Calm Plus: Cou-pling a Squeezable Tangible Interaction with Immersive VR for Stress Regulation. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems . 1–22. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790548 [181] Xuechen Zhang, Changyang He, Peng Zhang, Hansu Gu, Ning Gu, Qi Shen, Zhan Hu, and Tun Lu. 2025. RemiHaven: Integrating "In-Town" and "Out-of-Town" Peers to Provide Personalized Reminiscence Support for Older Drifters. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1034, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714277 [182] Xi Zheng, Zhuoyang Li, Xinning Gui, and Yuhan Luo. 2025. Customizing Emotional Support: How Do Individuals Construct and Interact With LLM-Powered Chatbots. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 376, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713453 [183] Barry J Zimmerman. 2002. Becoming a self-regulated learner: An overview. 

Theory into practice 41, 2 (2002), 64–70. [184] Wazeer Zulfikar, Treyden Chiaravalloti, Jocelyn Shen, Rosalind Picard, and Pattie Maes. 2025. Resonance: Drawing from Memories to Imagine Positive Futures through AI-Augmented Journaling. In Proceedings of the Augmented Humans International Conference 2025 (AHs ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 199–215. doi:10.1145/3745900.3746099 Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

## A ACM DL Query 

([Title: "mental health" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental well-being" OR "psychological health" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological well-being" OR "emotional health" OR "emotional wellbeing" OR "emotional well-being"] OR [Abstract: "mental health" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental well-being" OR "psychological health" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological well-being" OR "emotional health" OR "emotional wellbeing" OR "emotional well-being"] OR [Keywords: "mental health" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental well-being" OR "psychological health" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological well-being" OR "emotional health" OR "emotional wellbeing" OR "emotional well-being"]) AND ([Title: "intervention" OR "application" OR "app" OR "treatment" OR "care" OR "probe" OR "prototype" OR "system" OR "artifact" OR "chatbot" OR "agent" OR "tool" OR "interaction" OR "design" OR "device" OR "interface"] OR [Abstract: "intervention" OR "application" OR "app" OR "treatment" OR "care" OR "probe" OR "prototype" OR "system" OR "artifact" OR "chatbot" OR "agent" OR "tool" OR "interaction" OR "design" OR "device" OR "interface"] OR [Keywords: "intervention" OR "application" OR "app" OR "treatment" OR "care" OR "probe" OR "prototype" OR "system" OR "artifact" OR "chatbot" OR "agent" OR "tool" OR "interaction" OR "design" OR "device" OR "interface"]) 

in ACM DL, SIGCHI-sponsored venues, full papers, since 01/01/2015 

Search conducted through June 17, 2026. CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

## B Data Extraction Template 

Table 5: Data Extraction Template 

Descriptive Characteristics Contribution Intervention Approach 

(a) Venue 

(b) Year 

(c) First Author Country Affil. 

(d) Contribution Statement 

(e) Core Contribution Category 

(f) Target User Group 

(g) Participant Inclusion/Exclusion 

(h) Target Mental Health Issue 

(i) Short Description of Intervention 

(j) Intervention Functions 

(k) Self-Care Activity 

(l) Platform 

## C Paper coding for primary findings 

Table 6: Core Contribution 

Core Contribution 

Sub-theme 𝑁 Citations 

Addressing Underserved Populations & Contexts 32 [3, 6, 7, 27–30, 32, 40, 54, 55, 61, 65, 88, 94, 107, 113, 117, 122, 128, 131, 140, 142, 147, 152, 153, 157, 158, 169, 176, 181 ? ]Scalability 5 [7, 37, 40, 142, 178] Engagement & Adherence 15 [13, 43, 44, 68, 79, 85, 98, 109, 126, 137, 141, 144, 148, 174, 177] Personalization and Context-Awareness 22 [13, 14, 26, 27, 36, 51, 57, 58, 68, 77, 97, 125, 145, 148, 158, 162–164, 174, 179, 182, 184] Shifting to Everyday Contexts 14 [13, 28, 43, 62, 67, 72, 98, 111, 133, 145, 155, 163, 165, 175] Translating Clinical Care Beyond Clinical Settings 9 [48, 63, 78, 86, 125, 137, 144, 149, 157] Safety and Trust 7 [28, 63, 64, 77, 153, 174, 176] Enhancing Self-Care Activity through Novel Interaction 14 [23, 29, 56, 71, 72, 92, 93, 108, 119–121, 136, 171, 180] 

Table 7: Target User Group 

Target User Group 

Population 𝑁 Citations 

People with depression 3 [63, 77, 125] People with personality disorder 1 [157] Patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders 1 [176] People with bipolar disorder 1 [86] People with panic disorder 1 [128] People with disordered eating or eating disorders 2 [28, 149] Complex, difficult-to-treat disorders 1 [137] Mental health patients 1 [144] People with ADHD 1 [107] Autistic people 3 [61, 94, 142] People with learning disability 1 [157] Deaf and hard of hearing 1 [29] Children and youth 10 [6, 7, 65, 94, 107, 113, 117, 140, 147, 152] Young adults 1 [14] Older adults 7 [55, 88, 131, 153, 169, 181 ? ]Women 5 [3, 37, 149, 152, 157] Non-western or Non-WEIRD 2 [3, 152] Low SES 2 [6, 7] University students 10 [26, 27, 48, 64, 71, 97, 122, 162, 171, 178] Workers 3 [30, 40, 158] Caregivers 1 [54] General population 43 [13, 23, 32, 36, 43, 44, 51, 56–58, 62, 67, 68, 72, 78, 79, 85, 92, 93, 98, 108, 109, 111, 119– 121, 126, 133, 136, 141, 145, 148, 155, 163–165, 174, 175, 177, 179, 180, 182, 184] Self-Care and Mental Health: Mapping Over A Decade of HCI Interventions CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA 

Table 8: Mental Health Topics 

Mental Health Topics 

Target issue 𝑁 Citations 

General Well-being 17 [3, 14, 48, 54, 55, 61, 72, 79, 107, 113, 117, 141, 148, 153, 178, 182, 184] Emotion: Awareness and Reflection 17 [13, 23, 27, 29, 51, 56, 62, 78, 97, 98, 108, 109, 120, 121, 145, 165, 175] Emotion: Regulation 16 [29, 44, 51, 65, 67, 92, 94, 108, 121, 137, 144, 147, 157, 163, 164, 175] Stress/Relaxation 15 [27, 30, 36, 40, 57, 58, 64, 68, 93, 136, 152, 158, 177, 179, 180] Mindfulness or Bodily Awareness 14 [26, 43, 44, 67, 88, 93, 119, 126, 137, 149, 155, 157, 174, 177] Emotion: Expression 10 [23, 29, 62, 71, 109, 140, 152, 163, 165 ? ]Anxiety 9 [6, 7, 85, 122, 128, 131, 137, 142, 162] Social Connectedness or Loneliness 8 [32, 93, 111, 133, 169, 171, 181 ? ]Depression 7 [37, 63, 77, 125, 131, 137, 162] Bipolar 1 [86] Eating Disorders 1 [28] Schizophrenia 1 [176] 

Table 9: Activities 

Activities 

Activity 𝑁 Citations 

Conversing and social support 25 [3, 14, 23, 28, 29, 32, 63, 72, 77, 79, 88, 109, 113, 131, 136, 140, 141, 145, 148, 153, 162, 169, 181 ? , 182] (Self-)Tracking 22 [13, 14, 27, 30, 37, 40, 51, 57, 58, 62, 64, 71, 86, 97, 98, 117, 125, 128, 133, 142, 175, 176] Meditation/Mindfulness 13 [26, 43, 67, 68, 93, 119, 122, 126, 149, 152, 155, 157, 174] Sensory and physiological stimulation 13 [7, 44, 85, 94, 111, 136, 142, 144, 147, 157, 177, 179, 180] Journaling 11 [62, 63, 92, 97, 108, 109, 140, 145, 175, 178, 184] Artistic/creative expression 7 [56, 120, 152, 163–165, 179] Auditory (music, calming sounds) 6 [23, 29, 36, 55, 67, 149] Treatment program 4 [68, 137, 158, 175] Goal setting and planning 3 [61, 68, 107] Gaming 3 [6, 48, 144] Embodied and metaphorical actions 3 [65, 78, 121] Reminiscence 2 [157, 181] Informational resources 2 [54, 171] 

Table 10: Six Orientations of Self-Care in HCI 

Six Orientations of Self-Care in HCI 

Orientation 𝑁 Citations 

Making the Self Tangible 34 [6, 7, 23, 29, 43, 44, 56, 62, 63, 65, 71, 78, 92, 97, 108, 109, 119– 121, 126, 136, 144, 145, 147, 149, 152, 157, 163–165, 177–180] Quantifying the Self 29 [13, 26, 27, 30, 37, 40, 43, 44, 51, 57, 58, 61, 64, 86, 97, 98, 117, 119, 125, 126, 128, 133, 142, 144, 147, 175–177, 180] Training Self-Care Skills 21 [6, 7, 26, 30, 48, 54, 65, 68, 85, 88, 94, 109, 113, 122, 136, 137, 141, 148, 155, 162, 174] Enacting Social Care 18 [3, 14, 28, 32, 63, 72, 77–79, 111, 131, 140, 153, 169, 171, 181 ? , 182] Facilitating Actions 14 [14, 28, 40, 51, 57, 64, 88, 92, 107, 125, 140, 158, 176, 184] Attending to Affective Experience 10 [36, 55, 67, 93, 111, 142, 157, 162, 179, 181] CHI ’27, 2027, Pittsburgh, PA Fang, Wang & Fu 

## D PRISMA-ScR Checklist 

Table 11: PRISMA-ScR Checklist 

Section No. PRISMA-ScR checklist item Report Location TITLE 1 Identify the report as a scoping review. Introduction (Section 1), Abstract. We make an exception here due to a primary focus of our paper being a mapping framework emergent–but not part of–the review. We identify the scoping review in Abstract, Introduction, keywords, and throughout the paper. 

ABSTRACT 2 Provide a structured summary that includes, as applicable: background, objectives, eligibility criteria, sources of evidence, charting methods, results, and conclusions related to the review questions and objectives. Abstract (Page 1) 

INTRODUCTION 3 Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known. Explain why the review questions/objectives lend themselves to a scoping review approach. Introduction (Section 1), Background (Section 2) 4 Provide an explicit statement of the questions and objectives being addressed, with reference to their key elements (e.g., population or participants, concepts, and context) or other relevant elements used to conceptualize the review questions and/or objectives. Introduction (Section 1) 

METHODS 5 Indicate whether a review protocol exists; state if and where it can be accessed and, if available, provide registration information, including the registration number. Methods (Section 3) 6 Specify characteristics of the sources of evidence used as eligibility criteria (e.g., years considered, language, and publication status), and provide a rationale. Methods: Stage 2 (Section 3.2) 7 Describe all information sources in the search (e.g., databases with dates of coverage and contact with authors to identify additional sources), as well as the date the most recent search was executed. Methods: Stage 2 (Section 3.2) 8 Present the full electronic search strategy for at least one database, including any limits used, such that it could be repeated. Methods: Stage 2 (Section 3.2) and Appendix A 9 State the process for selecting sources of evidence (i.e., screening and eligibility) included in the scoping review. Methods: Stage 3 (Section 3.3) 10 Describe the methods of charting data from the included sources of evidence (e.g., calibrated or tested forms, whether data charting was done independently or in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators. Methods: Stage 4 (Section 3.4) 11 List and define all variables for which data were sought and any assumptions and simplifications made. Methods: Stage 4 (Section 3.4) 12 If done, provide a rationale for conducting a critical appraisal of included sources of evidence; describe the methods used and how this information was used in any data synthesis. N/A 13 Describe the methods of handling and summarizing the data that were charted. Methods: Stage 5 (Section 3.5) 

RESULTS 14 Give numbers of sources of evidence screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions at each stage, ideally using a flow diagram. Methods (Figure 2) and Results (Section 4) 15 For each source of evidence, present characteristics for which data were charted and provide the citations. Results (Section 4) 16 If done, present data on critical appraisal of included sources of evidence (see Item 12). N/A 17 For each included source of evidence, present the relevant data that were charted that relate to the review questions and objectives. Results (Section 4) 18 Summarize and/or present the charting results as they relate to the review questions and objectives. Results (Section 4) 

DISCUSSION 19 Summarize the main results, including an overview of concepts, themes, and types of evidence available; link to the review questions and objectives; and consider relevance to key groups. Framework (Section 5), Discussion (Section 6) 20 Discuss the limitations of the scoping review process. Discussion (Section 6) 21 Provide a general interpretation of the results with respect to the review questions and objectives, as well as potential implications and/or next steps. Discussion (Section 6) 

FUNDING 22 Describe sources of funding for the included sources of evidence, as well as sources of funding for the scoping review. Describe the role of the funders of the scoping review. Acknowledgements (after Section 7 Conclusion) 

Received September 2026