Title: Wiki-Talkie: Multilingual Benchmarking of Persona-Based Agents on Real-World Discussions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.08513v1

Published Time: Wed, 07 Oct 2026 01:59:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
## Wiki-Talkie: Multilingual Benchmarking of Persona-Based Agents on Real-World Discussions 

Dennis Fucci *

dennisfucci@gmail.com 

Andrea Bacciu Dong Liu Weronika Łajewska Saab Mansour 

Amazon 

{andbac, liuadong, lajewska, saabm}@amazon.com 

Abstract 

LLMs are increasingly deployed as au-tonomous agents in social environments, mak-ing it critical to study their ability to faithfully simulate human interactions. Central to this is grounding agents in realistic user personas, yet existing datasets rely on fictional personas and are limited to a handful of languages, lack-ing the empirical grounding necessary to eval-uate behavioral fidelity across diverse popula-tions. We introduce Wiki-Talkie, a multilin-gual dataset of real-world conversations from Wikipedia Talk pages across five languages spanning two language families: Germanic (German, English) and Romance (Spanish, French, Italian), paired with personas derived from real user communities and encompassing sociodemographic attributes, self-descriptions, and behaviorally grounded interaction traits. Using Wiki-Talkie, we evaluate agent interac-tional behavior on a next-turn generation task across various persona conditioning strategies. Our evaluation assesses whether agents collec-tively reproduce the distributional behavioral patterns observed in human discussions. Re-sults show that user’s comment history exempli-fying interaction behavior consistently outper-forms explicit persona information. In addition, models systematically underproduce negative or extreme sentiments, while over producing references and suggestions, revealing biases to-ward agreeableness and positivity. Crucially, these patterns hold robustly across languages, with small cross-lingual differences. 1

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly embedded in real-world social systems, from com-munity moderation on Reddit 2 to experimental plat- 

> *Work done during an internship at Amazon.
> 1Code and data are available at https://github.com/a mazon-science/wikitalkie .
> 2https://redditinc.com/news/oterlu-team-joins -reddit-to-accelerate-safety-efforts .

forms like MoltBook 3 where LLMs autonomously interact at scale. These developments position LLMs not merely as tools, but as agents : au-tonomous actors participating in governance, cul-ture, and social interaction. Central to the design of such agents is the role they are asked to play (Shanahan et al., 2023; Tseng et al., 2024), e.g. the 

persona , that is, a composite of individual traits such as background facts, language behavior, and interaction style (Liu et al., 2025a). This approach has been shown to improve alignment with real human populations in applications such as person-alized dialogues (Liu et al., 2025a), linguistic an-notation (Orlikowski et al., 2025), and social simu-lations (Argyle et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024). However, existing datasets for modeling persona-based conversational agents rely on fictional per-sonas (Smith et al., 2020; Jang et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022a,b; Yamashita et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2025; Lotfi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Occhipinti et al., 2024), making it impossible to verify whether agent behavior faithfully reflects the opinions, lin-guistic patterns, and interaction dynamics of the actual human population being simulated. Datasets extracting personas from large-scale media (Zheng et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021) offer greater real-ism but are limited to Chinese or English. To our best knowledge, there is no resource providing real-world, multilingual dialogues grounded in real per-sonas within a cooperative setting where pragmatic phenomena such as conflict, misalignment, and evolving viewpoints can emerge—precisely the dy-namics that characterize high-stakes scenarios. To fill this gap, we introduce Wiki-Talkie , a mul-tilingual dataset of real-world discussions extracted from Wikipedia Talk pages across five languages, where registered users collaboratively deliberate on article edits. Wiki-Talkie enables multifaceted eval-uation of agents in a consensus-oriented discussion 

> 3https://www.moltbook.com .arXiv:2610.08513v1 [cs.CL] 6 Oct 2026

scenario, with optional conditioning on personas derived from Wikipedia user pages, and behavioral traits from comment histories. To safeguard user privacy, all identities are anonymized and persona profiles are regenerated in a neutral fashion rather than verbatim copies, ensuring privacy protection while maintaining research utility. Our evaluation targets what we term popula-tion fidelity : whether agents collectively repro-duce the distributional behavioral patterns observed in human discussions, as opposed to individual-level persona fidelity , i.e., whether a single gener-ated response faithfully reflects the provided per-sona of a specific user. This choice is principled: individual-level fidelity risks enabling faithful sim-ulation of specific individuals, raising ethical con-cerns around impersonation and lack of consent (Desai et al., 2025), while population fidelity is more tractable and more relevant for applications such as community simulation and policy analy-sis. This aligns with an emerging consensus that evaluation of persona-based agents should operate at the population level (Mansour et al., 2025; Rup-precht et al., 2025; Fawaz et al., 2026). To assess population fidelity, we frame the task as next-turn generation : given a thread of previous comments, an agent must generate the next comment simulat-ing a specific Wikipedia editor. We conduct eval-uations with multiple metrics: instance-level text similarity (ROUGE-L and BERTScore), which pro-vides individual-level signals averaged across the entire dataset, and population-level interactional behavior, comparing sentiment and dialog act dis-tributions (Searle, 1969) between human comments and those generated by agents powered by multi-ple state-of-the-art LLMs, across five languages. We study how agents behave when conditioned on different types of persona information, comparing behavioral traits extracted from comment histories against explicit persona descriptions derived from user profiles. Results show that cross-lingual dif-ferences are small, consistent with prior work on multilingual LLM evaluation showing strong per-formance across high-resource languages (Xuan et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). We also find that com-ment history consistently proves more effective than explicit persona information as a conditioning strategy, suggesting that showing how a persona behaves outperforms telling what a persona is. Overall, our contributions are: 1) the construc-tion of Wiki-Talkie, a dataset of Wikipedia discus-sions supporting research on agentic interaction simulation, whose key advantages are: a) multilin-gual coverage; b) real-world discussions reflecting established communication norms; c) ground-truth persona information linked to discussions; and 

d) rich contextual information, with discussions paired with articles; 2) the evaluation of agents based on four LLMs under various conditioning strategies across five languages, providing insights into the limitations of current agentic simulation of human cooperative interactions. 

2 Related Work 

Datasets for Persona-based Evaluation Con-versational datasets with persona-related attributes vary in source, language, and use case. Crowd-sourced datasets dominate, exemplified by Per-sonaChat (Zhang et al., 2018b), where crowdwork-ers converse under fictional personas, and its many extensions: BlendedSkillTalk (Smith et al., 2020) adds empathy and knowledge, FoCus (Jang et al., 2022) adds Wikipedia grounding, Multi-Session Chat (Xu et al., 2022a) models longer-term in-teraction, DuLeMon (Xu et al., 2022b) uses Chi-nese mutual personas, and RealPersonaChat (Ya-mashita et al., 2023) collects real persona descrip-tions in Japanese. Other datasets rely on synthetic generation (Zhao et al., 2025; Lotfi et al., 2023) or scripted content (Chen et al., 2022; Occhip-inti et al., 2024), while social media datasets such as PersonalDialog (Zheng et al., 2020) and PER-CHAT (Wu et al., 2021) extract persona signals from large-scale platforms. Most rely on simulated role-play or synthetic generation and cover few languages: although XPersona (Lin et al., 2021) extends PersonaChat multilingually via automatic translation, naturally occurring interaction datasets remain largely restricted to English and Chinese. Critically, no existing resource simultaneously pro-vides: (i) naturally occurring dialogues, (ii) mul-tilingual coverage, (iii) real user-derived personas linked to the conversations, and (iv) a cooperative yet contentious setting where disagreement, negoti-ation, and consensus-building emerge. We address this gap with Wiki-Talkie. 

LLM Social Behavior A growing body of work documents systematic biases in LLM-generated social behavior. LLMs exhibit sycophantic tenden-cies, preferring agreement over truthful disagree-ment (Malmqvist, 2025), and display a positivity bias that suppresses negative or confrontational outputs (Santurkar et al., 2023). Studies using LLMs to simulate human populations have shown that, while persona conditioning can improve align-ment with survey response distributions (Argyle et al., 2023), models often fail to reproduce the full diversity of human opinions and behaviors (Or-likowski et al., 2025). However, these findings are predominantly based on English-only settings, synthetic survey tasks, or opinion elicitation, leav-ing open the question of whether such biases per-sist in naturalistic, multilingual, cooperative discus-sions. Wiki-Talkie addresses this gap by providing a testbed where LLM social behavior can be eval-uated against real human interactions across five languages in a collaborative setting with genuine disagreement and pragmatic complexity. 

Datasets Derived from Wikipedia Talks 

Wikipedia Talk pages remain underexplored despite providing large-scale, naturally occurring collaborative dialogue (Johnson et al., 2024). Prior work has used them to study conversational behav-ior and harmful interactions (Wulczyn et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018a), dialogue act classification (Ferschke et al., 2012), dispute detection (Wang and Cardie, 2014), sociolinguistics (Prabhakaran and Rambow, 2016), abuse (Cécillon et al., 2020), and links between discussions and edit histories (Jaidka et al., 2021). WikiConv (Hua et al., 2018) reconstructs full conversational histories including edits and deletions, supporting tasks such as preemptive toxicity detection (Karan and Šnajder, 2019). However, these datasets focus on discourse structure, conflict, or toxicity, remain mostly English-centric, and lack persistent persona representations for multilingual evaluation. To our knowledge, Talk pages have not been used to analyze LLM behavior in socially grounded, collaborative settings. 

3 Wiki-Talkie 

We introduce Wiki-Talkie , a multilingual dataset of real-world discussions extracted from Wikipedia Talk pages across five languages spanning two lan-guage families: Germanic (German, English) and Romance (Spanish, French, Italian). Wiki-Talkie is built around three core components (see Figure 1): 

1) multilingual threads in which users deliberate on article content; 2) user personas from two com-plementary sources, a self-reported profile derived from Wikipedia user pages (with attributes such as gender, profession, interests, and contribution top-ics) and behavioral traits inferred from each user’s 

> Figure 1: Example from Wiki-Talkie with its three core components: article, thread, and persona.

comment history; and 3) the article context, paired with each thread as it appeared immediately before the discussion began. Together, these components make Wiki-Talkie suited for research on persona-conditioned and document-grounded interaction modeling across languages. 4

Table 1 presents summary statistics of Wiki-Talkie across languages (full distributions in Ap-pendix A.1.1). German contributes the largest portion (>42K threads, >134K turns), followed by French and English, while Spanish and Italian form smaller subsets. Despite differences in scale, structural characteristics are remarkably consistent across languages: threads contain on average 3.2– 3.6 turns and involve 2.1–2.3 unique users. 5 Turn 

> 4Examples are in Appendix B, Tables 6–10.
> 5These statistics are not necessarily representative of

length varies more, ranging from 47.74 words (Ger-man) to 79.73 (Spanish), potentially reflecting dif-ferences in editorial culture or linguistic verbosity. High standard deviations across all metrics indicate substantial variability, consistent with discussions ranging from brief clarifications to extended de-bates. The number of unique users mirrors the thread distribution; further details on users and per-sonas are in Appendix A.1.2. 

3.1 Dataset Construction Threads The threads contained in Wiki-Talkie are extracted from raw Wikipedia Talk page dumps. 6 Wikipedia Talk pages are largely unstruc-tured, making clean conversation extraction a chal-lenging preprocessing task (Ferschke et al., 2012; Hua et al., 2018). We exploit standard conventions: MediaWiki heading syntax for topics, username-timestamp signatures, and colon-based reply inden-tation, and handcrafted regular expressions to parse threads into flat sequential turns ordered by times-tamps 7. To address extraction errors, we prompted the extractor model to revise threads by correcting turn boundaries and comment attributions, flagging irrecoverable cases for exclusion (prompt reported in Appendix C, Figure 10). 

Persona Profiles For each unique user in the extracted threads, we fetched the corresponding Wikipedia user page via the MediaWiki API. 8 User pages are optional personal spaces where editors describe themselves, their interests, expertise, and contributions. We prompted the extractor model to determine whether a page contained relevant biographical or self-descriptive content, exclud-ing pages consisting solely of administrative tem-plates or userboxes (prompt in Appendix C, Fig-ure 15). For pages with substantive content, the model also generated a natural-language profile summarizing all available details, following recent work on LLM-based persona extraction (Zhang, 2024; Wu et al., 2025; Mansour et al., 2025). Be-cause these are self-declared attributes from real users, the resulting personas avoid the stereotypical or synthetic quality of artificially constructed pro-    

> Wikipedia Talk pages at large, but reflect our construction pipeline (Section 3.1).
> 6Dumps from October 2025: https://dumps.wikimedi a.org/<lang_code>wiki/20251001/ .
> 7See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia: Talk_page_guidelines .
> 8https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API , accessed through mwclient (https://github.com/mwclient/mwcl ient ).

files and naturally incorporate sociodemographic aspects, making them valuable for evaluating how such factors influence agent behavior and biases. Alongside the profile, the model extracted prede-fined attributes in JSON format (e.g., primary edit-ing topics, gender, profession) to support statistical analysis of user subgroups. Users with success-fully generated profiles were subsampled to at most 10,000 per language, prioritizing presence of con-tribution topics, then gender (favoring women and non-binary users to counteract imbalance), then profession. Only threads where all participants belong to the selected subset were retained. 

Persona Behavioral Traits From each user’s comments (across up to 50 randomly sampled threads), we extracted behavioral traits using the extractor model, characterizing each user along eight dimensions including (dis)agreement strategy and editing behavior. Each dimension is filled with closed response options only when sufficient ev-idence is available, accompanied by the model’s reasoning (prompts in Appendix C, Figures 11– 13). Unlike self-declared profiles, these traits are inferred from concrete interactions, making them especially useful for evaluating how behavioral con-ditioning shapes agent output. A manual quality audit of profiles and traits (faithfulness, coherence, privacy preservation) is reported in Appendix I. 

Articles For each thread, the discussed Wikipedia article is retrieved via the MediaWiki API to provide conversational context, using the revision immediately preceding the first comment’s timestamp. This temporal alignment ensures the retrieved content reflects the article state when the discussion began. Finally, all usernames are anonymized via deter-ministic hashing to prevent re-identification, and thread and article formatting is cleaned and nor-malized for consistency. Full details are in Ap-pendix A.2. 

4 Experimental Setting 

Task Wiki-Talkie supports tasks including com-ment generation, summarization, and quality as-sessment. Here, we frame the task as next-turn gen-eration : given the preceding comments in a thread, an agent is asked to generate the next comment in the role of the real user who authored it. We al-ways condition on at least one preceding comment (i.e., the first turn is never generated from scratch), # Threads # Turns # Users Turns/Thread Turns/User Turn Length Users/Thread                                                                            

> de 38,711 123,520 6,282 3.19 ±1.92 19.93 ±53.93 48.09 ±56.80 2.11 ±0.35
> en 17,645 59,537 4,580 3.37 ±2.33 13.19 ±40.01 67.30 ±81.68 2.06 ±0.24
> es 5,229 17,019 2,307 3.25 ±2.13 7.55 ±19.41 79.80 ±96.36 2.14 ±0.42
> fr 23,983 86,041 4,952 3.59 ±2.37 17.59 ±58.68 66.32 ±79.56 2.26 ±0.61
> it 5,453 18,956 1,850 3.48 ±2.35 10.39 ±27.04 66.00 ±84.43 2.18 ±0.46

Table 1: Summary statistics of Wiki-Talkie ground-truth threads, turns, users, and average metrics (mean ± std). 

and prior context always consists of ground-truth comments. This task formulation was chosen de-liberately to enable controlled, comparable evalua-tion across languages and conditioning strategies, resulting in over 100 experimental conditions (5 languages × 4 models × 5 conditioning methods). Although Wiki-Talkie supports evaluation along several dimensions—including coherence with con-text, factual grounding in the associated article, and fidelity to persona conditioning—here we focus on interaction behavior of agents. 

Data To keep generation costs manageable, we experimented with a subsample of Wiki-Talkie. We selected threads involving users with at least six comments in the corpus, ensuring a minimum five-comment history prior to the target comment. From these, we sampled up to 5,000 threads per language, maximizing the proportion of comments authored by females up to 50%. Summary statistics are presented in Appendix D. 

Conditioning Methods We defined five condi-tioning methods to investigate how different types of persona information shape agent behavior in in-teractions: i) base role-play, where the agent is instructed that it is a Wikipedia editor with no ad-ditional information; ii) profile , where the agent is provided with the self-reported profile (gender, age, profession, etc.) of the user who produced the target comment; iii) behavior , where the agent is provided with the user’s behavioral traits; iv) 

behavior+r , same as behavior but including the extractor model’s reasoning; v) history , where the agent is provided with 5-20 comments by the same user (randomly sampled if more are avail-able), enabling indirect conditioning through stylis-tic and behavioral patterns in prior contributions. The prompts for each method are provided in Ap-pendix C, Figures 14, 15, 16, 17. 

Models We run experiments with four state-of-the-art models spanning both open-source and pro-prietary systems: Model A (proprietary), Model B, Model C, and Model D (open-weights). 9 All four are widely-used frontier LLMs at the top of their respective open-weights and proprietary classes at the time of writing, chosen to ensure that our findings reflect the behavior of strong, competitive systems rather than artifacts of weak models. Im-plementation and generation details are provided in Appendix E. 

Evaluation Metrics We report text similarity via ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004) for surface lexical overlap and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) for semantic similarity, both raw and rescaled against a baseline (rBERT) as recommended. 10 Since generation is open-ended, these are coarse reference points rather than primary criteria. Our primary focus is interactional behavior . We extract dialogue acts using the taxonomy of Fer-schke et al. (2012), developed for Wikipedia Talk pages, considering 10 acts: CRITIQUE , REQUEST ,

> REFERENCE

, COMMIT , REPORT , INFORM , ASK ,

> POSITIVE

, NEGATIVE , and PARTIAL .11 Both hu-man and agent comments are annotated with the extractor model as LLM annotator (prompt in Ap-pendix C, Figure 12), which achieves 0.76 F1 against human judgment (Appendix F). Each com-ment can carry one or multiple acts. We addition-ally assess overall response tone via sentiment pre-diction on both human and agent comments. 12 

All metrics are computed at the dataset level. BERTScore and ROUGE-L are averaged over all output-reference pairs. Sentiment and dialogue act distributions are compared via Wasserstein Distance (WD; Panaretos and Zemel, 2019) and        

> 9Model identities are withheld; we report results under anonymized labels (Model A–Model D).
> 10 https://github.com/Tiiiger/bert_score .
> 11 Mapping to Ferschke et al. (2012) is in Appendix F.
> 12 Using the multilingual model https://huggingface. co/tabularisai/multilingual-sentiment-analysis ,predicting on a five-point scale from very negative to very positive .Figure 2: ROUGE-L and rescaled BERTScore between humans and agents across the five conditioning methods.
> Left: averages across models for each language. Right: averages across languages for each model.

Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD; Menéndez et al., 1997), reflecting the ordinal nature of sentiment and the nominal nature of acts. This aggregate perspective targets population fidelity —whether agents collectively reproduce distributional behav-ioral tendencies—rather than individual-level per-sona fidelity. ROUGE-L and BERTScore are com-puted at the instance level against each target user’s ground-truth response and then averaged across the dataset. 

5 Results 

5.1 Text Similarity 

Figure 2 shows ROUGE-L and rBERT scores averaged across models and languages; full re-sults, including average comment length and raw BERTScore (which remains stable across setups, 

∼0.84 –0.85 , and is thus less informative), are in Appendix G, Tables 11–12. While our primary tar-get is population fidelity (Section 4), these instance-level metrics provide a complementary individual-level signal. ROUGE-L scores never exceed 0.154 . While low in absolute terms, this is expected given the open-ended nature of the task, where the space of plausible responses is virtually unbounded; scores are thus best read as relative measures. rBERT hov-ers around zero, indicating that agent-human sim-ilarity is broadly comparable to random sentence-human pairs, further confirming the difficulty of the task .Across both languages and models, history 

consistently yields the highest similarity, with ROUGE-L up to 0.154 (Model A in es ) and rBERT up to 0.105 (Model A in de ). behavior+r is the second most effective, with consistent gains over 

base (e.g., ROUGE-L up to 0.138 for Model A in es ; rBERT up to 0.085 for Model A in de ). By contrast, profile generally degrades similarity rel-ative to base (e.g., rBERT drops on average from 

0.053 to 0.040 for Model A, and from −0.017 to 

−0.049 for Model D), likely because prompting agents to reflect persona traits leads them to in-corporate non-relevant details, producing longer and more elaborated responses without improving content alignment. Indeed, agent comments are consistently longer than human comments across all conditions (Appendix G). behavior similarly fails to improve similarity for most models and lan-guages, with only modest gains in some cases (e.g., Model B’s ROUGE-L from 0.078 to 0.082 ). Cross-lingually, ROUGE-L scores are consis-tently higher for es and en than for de and it ,partially mirroring human comment length: longer reference texts provide richer surface for lexical overlap. rBERT trends are less pronounced; en 

falls slightly below the others, largely driven by Model B’s particularly low English scores. Overall, concrete demonstrations —through comment histories ( history ) or behavioral traits paired with reasoning ( behavior+r )— are more effective than abstract descriptions (behavior )

and sociodemographic information (profile )at steering agent output toward human-like text. This is the dominant pattern across models and lan-guages, while cross-lingual differences remain Figure 3: JSD between human and agent dialog act distributions across conditioning methods. Left: averages across models for each language. Right: averages across languages for each model. 

small , though we note that all five languages are high-resource and European. The consistency is nonetheless non-trivial given that they span two lan-guage families and differ in Wikipedia community size and editorial norms. 

5.2 Interaction Behavior 

In the following we discuss evaluation of behav-ioral patterns through dialog act JSD and sentiment WD; detailed scores are reported in Appendix G, Tables 13 and 14. 

Acts JSD. Figure 3 presents average JSD scores aggregated across models (left) and languages (right). Scores range between 0.1 and 0.3, indicat-ing only moderate divergence between human and agent dialogue act distributions . history 

is the strongest method, achieving the lowest JSD overall ( 0.085 for Model A in en ). behavior+r 

is second, with consistent gains over base (e.g., Model B: 0.272 → 0.241 ; Model D: 0.199 →

0.166 ). By contrast, behavior is the weakest, in-creasing JSD across most models and languages (except Model B, where it improves over base ,

0.272 → 0.245 ). profile yields only marginal effects, with gains limited to Model A ( 0.150 →

0.147 ). These trends are broadly consistent across languages, though en achieves the lowest average JSD throughout (e.g., 0.188 under base , 0.175 un-der behavior+r ), likely reflecting English-centric pretraining. Cross-lingual differences, however, remain marginal .Overall, these results reinforce the pattern ob-served for text similarity: concrete behavioral demonstrations (history , behavior+r ) are con-sistently more effective than abstract descrip-tions or sociodemographic factors (behavior ,

profile ) at aligning agent behavior with hu-man distributions, echoing the well-established advantage of few-shot over zero-shot condition-ing (Brown et al., 2020). One might wonder whether this gap reflects a difference in information type or simply in infor-mation quantity , since history provides 5–20 raw comments while profile and behavior supply compressed summaries. We address this concern in Appendix H, where we show that performance under profile does not improve consistently with profile length: ROUGE-L and rBERT are flat, and where acts and sentiment JSD change, they mostly worsen with longer profiles. Combined with the observation that profile degrades performance relative to base despite adding tokens, this argues against a pure context-budget explanation and sup-ports our interpretation that the operative factor is information type, not quantity. 

Per-act differences To assess whether diver-gences concentrate on specific labels, we analyze per-label proportion differences ( δ) between hu-man and agent distributions, where positive values indicate human over-production and negative val-ues indicate agent over-production. Figure 4 shows differences averaged across languages, omitting acts with negligible variation (A SK , C RITIQUE ,POSITIVE , P ARTIAL ). Differences are computed between proportions rather than raw counts to ac-count for lower act density in agent comments (Ap-pendix G). Full breakdowns are in Tables 13–14. Agents systematically over-produce R EQUEST 

(up to δ = −0.177 for Model C in de on behavior )and C OMMIT (up to δ = −0.108 for Model D in 

fr on behavior ), while humans produce more R E- 

> PORT

(δ = 0 .088 for Model C in fr on behavior ). Together, this suggests that agents tend to operate 

by requesting and committing to changes, yet re-port fewer actions already undertaken. I NFORM 

is under-produced by agents across most models, possibly reflecting insufficient factual grounding (Model A and Model D diverge in some meth-ods). R EFERENCE shows a model-dependent pat-tern. N EGATIVE is consistently under-produced Figure 4: Proportion difference between human and agent dialog acts. Positive values indicate human over-production; negative values indicate agent over-production. Differences are averaged across languages.   

> Figure 5: Distribution of sentiment scores for human and agent (Model A under history ) comments for en .

(δ from 0.020 to 0.104 ), consistent with sycophan-tic tendencies of LLMs (Malmqvist, 2025). Over-all, the most systematic biases concern operativity 

(over-production of R EQUEST , C OMMIT ) and neg-ativity (under-production of N EGATIVE , R EPORT ), 

pointing to a consistent tendency for agents to be more action-oriented and less confrontational than humans. Per-act differences by gender To examine whether agents reproduce dialog act trends equi-tably across genders, we analyze per-label pro-portion differences split by gender for two mod-els with contrasting alignment levels (Model A, higher; Model B, lower) and two languages with similar contrast (English, higher; French, lower), under history (best overall), profile (the only method with explicit gender), and base as refer-ence. Differences are shown in Appendix G, Fig-ure 18. Trends are consistent across genders for all labels and methods. Crucially, profile does not behave systematically differently from base 

or history , indicating that explicit gender con-ditioning neither amplifies nor reduces gender disparities in dialog act profiles .

Sentiment Sentiment alignment broadly mirrors the dialog act trends: history yields the best align-ment (minimum WD 0.097 for Model C in en ), followed by behavior+r (0.168 in en ). Across languages, en shows the lowest WD ( 0.315 on av-erage under base ) and es the highest ( 0.452 ), con-sistently across methods. As shown in Figure 5 for Model A under history , agent responses rarely ex-hibit sentiment extremes ( very positive or very neg-ative ) and contain fewer negative comments than humans, consistent with their lower rate of N EG - 

> ATIVE

acts. These patterns hold across models, conditioning methods, and languages (Appendix G, Figure 19). Overall, sentiment converges with the broader finding that agents tend to avoid negative or confrontational content across all condition-ing methods .

6 Conclusions 

We introduced Wiki-Talkie, a multilingual dataset derived from Wikipedia Talk pages to evaluate agent interactions across five languages, using four state-of-the-art LLMs under different persona con-ditioning strategies. Our evaluation targets pop-ulation fidelity—whether agents collectively re-produce the distributional behavioral patterns of human communities—complemented by instance-level text similarity metrics. Our experiments show that grounding agents with concrete comment ex-amples consistently outperforms abstract persona descriptions across all languages. Notably, so-ciodemographic information can degrade agent performance, an encouraging finding for privacy-preserving applications. In addition, agents are con-sistently more action-oriented and less confronta-tional than humans, revealing a bias toward agree-ableness and avoidance of extremes. Cross-lingual differences remain small, with English showing only slightly greater alignment. Overall, these re-sults underscore both the promise and limitations of persona-conditioned generation, motivating further research into more effective simulation strategies. While we focused on next-turn generation to enable controlled comparison across a large experimental space, Wiki-Talkie is designed to support richer evaluation settings, including multi-turn genera-tion, summarization, factual grounding assessment, and quality evaluation, all of which we encourage the community to explore. 

Limitations 

Dataset Construction Despite our multi-stage extraction and revision pipeline, some residual noise remains in Wiki-Talkie, including occa-sional misattributed comments, imperfect com-ment boundaries, and formatting artifacts not fully resolved during preprocessing Such noise is in-evitable at this scale and is unlikely to substantially affect evaluation or analysis. 

Language Coverage Wiki-Talkie currently cov-ers five European languages (English, German, Spanish, French, and Italian), limiting its cultural and linguistic diversity. While these languages span two distinct families (Romance and Germanic) and vary in Wikipedia community size and editorial norms, they are all high-resource; findings may not generalize to language communities with different writing systems, discourse conventions, or editorial practices. Future work should extend Wiki-Talkie to additional languages, particularly those under-represented in NLP research. The dataset construc-tion pipeline and evaluation framework are fully language-agnostic and straightforwardly extensible to lower-resource and non-European languages. 

Dataset Richness The richness and consistency of user personas vary considerably within and across languages. Some profiles contain detailed self-reported attributes, while others are sparse. En-glish is generally better represented in both quantity and quality, meaning persona conditioning exper-iments may be more reliable for English than for other languages. Moreover, despite subsampling to increase the representation of women and non-binary users, the dataset remains gender-skewed, which may affect the robustness of gender-based analyses. 

Persona Conditioning Our experiments focus exclusively on prompting-based persona condi-tioning, leaving alternative approaches to future work, such as fine-tuning (e.g., Thakur et al., 2024; Takayama et al., 2025), retrieval-augmented con-ditioning (e.g., Huang et al., 2023; Salemi et al., 2024), or embedding-based persona representa-tions (e.g, Liu et al., 2025b). 

Information Density across Conditioning Meth-ods Our conditioning methods are not strictly matched on information density: history provides 5–20 raw comments, while profile and behavior 

supply compressed summaries. We probe this con-found in Appendix H by stratifying profile per-formance by profile length and find no consistent improvement with profile length across four met-rics, supporting an information-type rather than information-quantity interpretation. We did not perform the analogous analysis for history length because the conditioning pool is concentrated in the 16–20 comment range, leaving lower-comment buckets too sparse to support a meaningful compar-ison. A fully matched ablation—e.g., comparing 

history against equally long synthetic summaries distilled from the same comments—remains a di-rection for future work. 

Scope of Persona Representations Our profiles and behavioral traits are produced by a single anonymized extractor model and a specific prompt-ing design. A manual audit (Appendix I) indicates that these representations are largely faithful and well-grounded, with imprecisions limited to iso-lated factual details. Nonetheless, our findings about profile and behavior should be read as conclusions about sociodemographic and behav-ioral descriptors as we generated them , rather than as universal claims about all possible persona rep-resentations. Alternative summarization strategies, richer attribute schemas, or different extractor mod-els could in principle yield different results. 

Evaluation Scope Our primary evaluation tar-get is population fidelity —whether agents col-lectively reproduce the distributional behavioral patterns observed in human discussions—rather than individual-level persona fidelity , i.e., whether each generated response faithfully reflects the spe-cific persona provided. This choice is principled: individual-level fidelity risks enabling faithful sim-ulation of specific individuals, raising ethical con-cerns around impersonation and lack of consent (Desai et al., 2025), while population fidelity is more tractable and more relevant for applications such as community simulation and policy analysis, in line with recent work advocating population-level evaluation of persona-based agents (Mansour et al., 2025; Fawaz et al., 2026; Rupprecht et al., 2025). Assessing fine-grained individual-level per-sona consistency remains a direction for future work. 

Ethic Statement 

Privacy, Data Protection, and Contextual Integrity 

Wiki-Talkie is derived from Wikipedia dumps, re-leased under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 license. While publicly accessible, we recognize that contributors may reasonably ex-pect their comments to be archived for research purposes but not necessarily used for persona-conditioned simulation. Accordingly, we treat this dataset as human-derived data requiring safeguards beyond copyright compliance, guided by the prin-ciples of data minimization, proportionality, con-textual integrity, and harm reduction. 

Dataset Construction and Anonymization The dataset does not contain original user pages ver-batim. Instead, we generated neutral, natural-language re-elaborations summarizing publicly stated interests and interactional patterns, delib-erately omitting usernames, real names, contact information, and external links. This process inher-ently introduces a layer of abstraction: the resulting profiles are approximate characterizations that may diverge from the original content through omission, rephrasing, or occasional inaccuracy. While this means profiles should not be treated as ground-truth descriptions of actual persons, we acknowledge that the same process may occasionally introduce erroneous attributes, including sensitive ones. We sought to mitigate this risk through manual inspec-tion of a random sample of outputs (see Appendix I). Usernames are replaced using salted crypto-graphic hashing, where the salt is stored separately from the dataset and is accessible only to the prin-cipal investigator, preventing straightforward re-versal or precomputation attacks (see Appendix A.2). Within comment text, we also anonymized mentions of third-party usernames to the extent possible. However, a residual risk remains where usernames appear in non-standard forms or where real names are mentioned in conversation. 

Re-Identification Risk and Access Control 

Complete anonymity cannot be guaranteed when working with public textual data. While salted hashing prevents trivial username reconstruction, a content-based re-identification risk exists: because Wikipedia discussions are publicly archived and indexed, motivated individuals could potentially identify original authors via distinctive phrases or search queries. Our dataset does not introduce new exposure beyond what is already publicly ac-cessible, but we recognize that aggregation and structuring may lower the cost of such searches. To mitigate these risks, the dataset is released under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license, inherited from the underlying Wikipedia-derived content. Rather than hosting an open public mirror, we distribute it through a lightweight access request in which prospective users identify themselves and their in-tended use. This provides an audit trail and a point of contact while raising the effort required for in-discriminate bulk access. As a matter of research norms rather than a binding condition, we ask that recipients not attempt to de-anonymize contribu-tors, not use the data to impersonate or manipulate editorial processes, and work from the most recent release. We provide a dedicated contact address for indi-viduals who wish to request removal of their data. Upon verification, corresponding entries are added to a blocklist and removed in subsequent releases. Our goal is risk mitigation rather than elimination, and we consider the residual risk proportionate to the scientific value of studying collaborative online deliberation at scale. 

Informed Consent Individual informed consent was not sought, as contributions to Wikipedia are made under the CC BY-SA license and the Wiki-media Foundation’s Terms of Use, which explicitly permit reuse and derivative works. This is consis-tent with established practice in NLP research on Wikipedia-derived data (Ferschke et al., 2012; Hua et al., 2018), and the scale of contributors makes individual consent infeasible. Nevertheless, we rec-ognize that licensing permissibility does not fully resolve the ethical tension between contributors’ original communicative intent and downstream re-search applications; we address this gap through the layered safeguards described above. 

Harmful or Sensitive Content Wikipedia Talk pages may occasionally contain harassment, con-flictual exchanges, or incidental personal disclo-sures. We do not seek to amplify or foreground such content; the dataset is designed to analyze aggregate interaction patterns in collaborative envi-ronments, not for reputational analysis of specific contributors. We did not apply active content filter-ing in order to preserve the ecological validity of the discussions. Access restrictions are intended to further prevent misuse or amplification of harmful material. 

Experimental Ethics and Persona Conditioning 

The objective of this research is not to recre-ate, approximate, or impersonate specific individ-uals. Persona-conditioned agents are stochastic constructs derived from coarse behavioral sum-maries, used solely to examine population-level dy-namics in simulated group discussions. Although individual-level conditioning is methodologically necessary to capture heterogeneity in interaction styles, all evaluation and reporting are conducted at the aggregate level. We do not evaluate model fidelity to specific users, publish individual out-puts, or claim to model the beliefs, intentions, or identities of real contributors. We recognize that repurposing public discourse for AI research raises novel ethical questions con-cerning digital representation and contextual in-tegrity. Our ethical justification rests on pro-portionality: the scientific value of understand-ing large-scale collaborative behavior, combined with layered safeguards (anonymization, profile re-elaboration, controlled access, opt-out mecha-nisms), outweighs the residual and mitigated risks. References 

Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R. Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David Wingate. 2023. Out of one, many: Using language mod-els to simulate human samples. Political Analysis ,31(3):337–351. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Benjamin Cabrera, Björn Ross, Marielle Dado, and Maritta Heisel. 2018. The gender gap in wikipedia talk pages. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , 12(1). Noé Cécillon, Vincent Labatut, Richard Dufour, and Georges Linarès. 2020. WAC: A corpus of Wikipedia conversations for online abuse detection. In Proceed-ings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evalua-tion Conference , pages 1382–1390, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Yirong Chen, Weiquan Fan, Xiaofen Xing, Jianxin Pang, Minlie Huang, Wenjing Han, Qianfeng Tie, and Xi-angmin Xu. 2022. CPED: A large-scale chinese per-sonalized and emotional dialogue dataset for conver-sational ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14727 .Smit Desai, Mateusz Dubiel, Nima Zargham, Thomas Mildner, and Laura Spillner. 2025. Personas evolved: Designing ethical LLM-based conversational agent personalities. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Con-ference on Conversational User Interfaces (CUI ’25) .ACM. Kassem Fawaz, Ran Yi, Octavian Suciu, Ritesh Khan-delwal, Hamza Harkous, Nina Taft, and Marco Gruteser. 2026. Text-based personas for simulating user privacy decisions. Preprint , arXiv:2603.19791. Oliver Ferschke, Iryna Gurevych, and Yevgen Chebotar. 2012. Behind the article: Recognizing dialog acts in Wikipedia talk pages. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , pages 777–786, Avignon, France. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yiqing Hua, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Dario Taraborelli, Nithum Thain, Jeffery Sorensen, and Lu-cas Dixon. 2018. WikiConv: A corpus of the com-plete conversational history of a large online collabo-rative community. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2818–2823, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qiushi Huang, Shuai Fu, Xubo Liu, Wenwu Wang, Tom Ko, Yu Zhang, and Lilian Tang. 2023. Learning retrieval augmentation for personalized dialogue gen-eration. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2523–2540, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Kokil Jaidka, Andrea Ceolin, Iknoor Singh, Niyati Chhaya, and Lyle Ungar. 2021. WikiTalkEdit: A dataset for modeling editors’ behaviors on Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 2191–2200, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Yoonna Jang, Jungwoo Lim, Yuna Hur, Dongsuk Oh, Suhyune Son, Yeonsoo Lee, Donghoon Shin, Se-ungryong Kim, and Heuiseok Lim. 2022. Call for customized conversation: Customized conversation grounding persona and knowledge. In AAAI-22 Tech-nical Tracks 10 , Proceedings of the 36th AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, pages 10803–10812. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Publisher Copyright: Copy-right © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights re-served.; 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence, AAAI 2022 ; Conference date: 22-02-2022 Through 01-03-2022. Isaac Johnson, Lucie-Aimée Kaffee, and Miriam Redi. 2024. Wikimedia data for AI: a review of wikime-dia datasets for NLP tasks and AI-assisted editing. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Advancing Natural Language Processing for Wikipedia , pages 91–101, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Vanja Mladen Karan and Jan Šnajder. 2019. Preemptive toxic language detection in Wikipedia comments us-ing thread-level context. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online , pages 129– 134, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zihao Li, Yucheng Shi, Zirui Liu, Fan Yang, Ali Payani, Ninghao Liu, and Mengnan Du. 2025. Language ranker: A metric for quantifying llm performance across high and low-resource languages. In Proceed-ings of the Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Arti-ficial Intelligence (AAAI-25) , pages 28186–28194. AAAI Press. AAAI’25/IAAI’25/EAAI’25 Proceed-ings. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-tion Branches Out , pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhaojiang Lin, Zihan Liu, Genta Indra Winata, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Andrea Madotto, Yejin Bang, Etsuko Ishii, and Pascale Fung. 2021. XPersona: Evaluating multilingual personalized chatbot. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Natural Language Process-ing for Conversational AI , pages 102–112, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dongshuo Liu, Zhijing Wu, Dandan Song, and Heyan Huang. 2025a. A persona-aware LLM-enhanced framework for multi-session personalized dialogue generation. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 103–123, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jiongnan Liu, Yutao Zhu, Shuting Wang, Xiaochi Wei, Erxue Min, Yu Lu, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025b. LLMs + persona-plug = per-sonalized LLMs. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9373–9385, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Ehsan Lotfi, Maxime De Bruyn, Jeska Buhmann, and Walter Daelemans. 2023. PersonalityChat: Conver-sation distillation for personalized dialog modeling with facts and traits. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Evalua-tion, and Metrics (GEM) , pages 353–371, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lars Malmqvist. 2025. Sycophancy in large language models: Causes and mitigations. In Intelligent Com-puting , pages 61–74, Cham. Springer Nature Switzer-land. Saab Mansour, Leonardo Perelli, Lorenzo Mainetti, George Davidson, and Stefano D’Amato. 2025. PAARS: Persona aligned agentic retail shoppers. In 

Proceedings of the 1st Workshop for Research on Agent Language Models (REALM 2025) , pages 143– 159, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. M.L. Menéndez, J.A. Pardo, L. Pardo, and M.C. Pardo. 1997. The jensen-shannon divergence. Journal of the Franklin Institute , 334(2):307–318. Daniela Occhipinti, Serra Sinem Tekiro˘ glu, and Marco Guerini. 2024. PRODIGy: a PROfile-based DIalogue generation dataset. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pages 3500–3514, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Matthias Orlikowski, Jiaxin Pei, Paul Röttger, Philipp Cimiano, David Jurgens, and Dirk Hovy. 2025. Be-yond demographics: Fine-tuning large language mod-els to predict individuals’ subjective text perceptions. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2092–2111, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Victor M. Panaretos and Yoav Zemel. 2019. Statistical aspects of wasserstein distances. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 6(1):405–431. Minju Park, Sojung Kim, Seunghyun Lee, Soonwoo Kwon, and Kyuseok Kim. 2024. Empowering per-sonalized learning through a conversation-based tu-toring system with student modeling. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’24, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2016. A corpus of Wikipedia discussions: Over the years, with topic, power and gender labels. In Proceed-ings of the Tenth International Conference on Lan-guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages 2034–2038, Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Jonas Rupprecht, Leon Fröhling, Claudia Wagner, and Markus Strohmaier. 2025. German general per-sonas: A survey-derived persona prompt collec-tion for population-aligned LLM studies. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.21722. Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. 2024. LaMP: When large lan-guage models meet personalization. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 7370–7392, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Whose opinions do language models reflect? In 

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR. John R. Searle. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Phi-losophy of Language . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Murray Shanahan, Kyle McDonell, and Laria Reynolds. 2023. Role play with large language models. Nature ,623:493–498. Eric Michael Smith, Mary Williamson, Kurt Shuster, Jason Weston, and Y-Lan Boureau. 2020. Can you put it all together: Evaluating conversational agents’ ability to blend skills. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2021–2030, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Junya Takayama, Masaya Ohagi, Tomoya Mizumoto, and Katsumasa Yoshikawa. 2025. Persona-consistent dialogue generation via pseudo preference tuning. In 

Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 5507–5514, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Himanshu Thakur, Eshani Agrawal, and Smruthi Mukund. 2024. Personas within parameters: Fine-tuning small language models with low-rank adapters to mimic user behaviors. In Adaptive Foundation Models: Evolving AI for Personalized and Efficient Learning .Yu-Min Tseng, Yu-Chao Huang, Teng-Yun Hsiao, Wei-Lin Chen, Chao-Wei Huang, Yu Meng, and Yun-Nung Chen. 2024. Two tales of persona in LLMs: A survey of role-playing and personalization. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 16612–16631, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lu Wang and Claire Cardie. 2014. A piece of my mind: A sentiment analysis approach for online dispute de-tection. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 693–699, Baltimore, Maryland. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Shenghan Wu, Yimo Zhu, Wynne Hsu, Mong-Li Lee, and Yang Deng. 2025. From personas to talks: Re-visiting the impact of personas on LLM-synthesized emotional support conversations. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 5439–5453, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yuwei Wu, Xuezhe Ma, and Diyi Yang. 2021. Personal-ized response generation via generative split memory network. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 1956–1970, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ellery Wulczyn, Nithum Thain, and Lucas Dixon. 2017. Ex machina: Personal attacks seen at scale. In Pro-ceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web , WWW ’17, page 1391–1399, Re-public and Canton of Geneva, CHE. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee. Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022a. Be-yond goldfish memory: Long-term open-domain con-versation. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5180–5197, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xinchao Xu, Zhibin Gou, Wenquan Wu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Shihang Wang. 2022b. Long time no see! open-domain conversation with long-term persona memory. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 ,pages 2639–2650, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Weihao Xuan, Rui Yang, Heli Qi, Qingcheng Zeng, Yunze Xiao, Aosong Feng, Dairui Liu, Yun Xing, Jun-jue Wang, Fan Gao, Jinghui Lu, Yuang Jiang, Huitao Li, Xin Li, Kunyu Yu, Ruihai Dong, Shangding Gu, Yuekang Li, Xiaofei Xie, and 13 others. 2025. MMLU-ProX: A multilingual benchmark for ad-vanced large language model evaluation. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1513–1532, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sanae Yamashita, Koji Inoue, Ao Guo, Shota Mochizuki, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Ryuichiro Hi-gashinaka. 2023. RealPersonaChat: A realistic per-sona chat corpus with interlocutors’ own personal-ities. In Proceedings of the 37th Pacific Asia Con-ference on Language, Information and Computation ,pages 852–861, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiarui Zhang. 2024. Guided profile generation improves personalization with large language models. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4005–4016, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Justine Zhang, Jonathan Chang, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lucas Dixon, Yiqing Hua, Dario Taraborelli, and Nithum Thain. 2018a. Conversations gone awry: Detecting early signs of conversational failure. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1350–1361, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Saizheng Zhang, Emily Dinan, Jack Urbanek, Arthur Szlam, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2018b. Per-sonalizing dialogue agents: I have a dog, do you have pets too? In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2204–2213, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Evalu-ating text generation with BERT. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 . OpenRe-view.net. Zheng Zhao, Clara Vania, Subhradeep Kayal, Naila Khan, Shay B Cohen, and Emine Yilmaz. 2025. Per-sonaLens: A benchmark for personalization evalua-tion in conversational AI assistants. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 18023–18055, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Yinhe Zheng, Guanyi Chen, Minlie Huang, Song Liu, and Xuan Zhu. 2020. Personalized dia-logue generation with diversified traits. Preprint ,arXiv:1901.09672. 

A Further Wiki-Talkie Details 

A.1 Statistics A.1.1 Distributions 

Figure 6 shows the distributions of the number of words per turn, turns per user, turns per thread, and users per thread across the five languages. These statistical properties exhibit remarkably consistent patterns across languages, suggesting that the con-versational dynamics of the dataset are largely language-agnostic. (a) de (b) en     

> (c) es (d) fr
> (e) it
> Figure 6: Distributions of words per turn, turns per user, turns per thread, users per thread across the five languages.

Words per Turn The distribution is heavily right-skewed in every language, with the vast majority of turns containing fewer than 200 words, indicating that most conversational exchanges are brief while a small number of turns involve substantially longer responses. The 1,000-word cap applied uniformly across all languages, as threads containing longer turns were excluded due to their higher likelihood of noise. 

Turns per User This distribution is similarly right-skewed, with most users contributing only a handful of turns. The bulk of users fall below 50 turns across all languages, with the long tail suggesting a small cohort of highly active partic-ipants. The Italian and Spanish subsets exhibit a narrower spread, consistent with the smaller num-ber of threads collected for these languages. 

Turns per Thread Threads are predominantly short, with the modal thread containing between 2 and 5 turns across all languages. This suggests that most conversations are transactional or goal-oriented rather than extended dialogues, with very few threads exceeding 10 turns. 

Users per Thread The vast majority of threads involve exactly 2 users, reflecting a typical dyadic conversation structure. Threads with 3 or more participants are rare across all languages, with the distribution dropping off sharply beyond 2 users. 

A.1.2 Users and Personas 

In Table 2, we show statistics on users and per-sonas, with Figure 7 showing the corresponding word distributions for user pages and profiles. User pages are right-skewed across all languages, with most users having short pages and a minority pro-ducing substantially longer ones. Profiles follow a more bell-shaped distribution centered around 50– 100 words, reflecting the relatively standardized length of the persona descriptions we construct from user metadata, and confirming that our per-sona extraction distills user information into con-cise, consistent summaries regardless of the under-lying page length. English users exhibit the richest descriptions, with both the longest average user pages and profile lengths (98.07 words), and near-complete coverage of contribution topics (100%), gender (67%), and profession (66%), reflecting the larger and more active English Wikipedia commu-nity. German users, while numerous, show lower rates of gender (36%) and profession (26%) disclo-sure despite high topic coverage (98.9%). Spanish, French, and Italian users display more modest at-tribute coverage, particularly for profession, reflect-ing sparser self-descriptions in these communities. The column reporting users with at least five turns indicates a core of highly active contributors in each language, ranging from approximately 30% (Spanish, Italian) to nearly 50% (German). Figure 8 shows the proportion of non-deducible or, less frequently, malformed behavioral trait val-ues across all users, broken down by trait and lan-guage. Agreement Strategy , Consensus Orienta-tion , and Disagreement Strategy consistently ac-count for the largest shares across all languages, possibly due to the lower frequency of these behav-ioral aspects in user comments. Notably, Spanish exhibits the highest proportion in Agreement Strat-egy (∼0.50), while the remaining languages clus-ter more tightly around lower values. Traits such as Editing Behavior , Policy Usage , Tone Manage-ment , and Writing Style and Comment Structure 

show uniformly low proportions ( ≤0.10) across all languages. Overall, cross-language variation is modest, with no language systematically underper-forming across all traits. 

A.2 Anonymization and Normalization 

All usernames in Wiki-Talkie are anonymized via deterministic hashing with a keyed hash function and salt, ensuring consistent mapping across the dataset while preventing reversal. Username oc-currences are identified and replaced not only in structured metadata but also within comment text, where editors frequently mention one an-other through wikilink syntax or plain text refer-ences. 13 Thread formatting is then cleaned and normalized: leading and trailing decorative char-acters (dashes, equals signs) are removed, HTML line breaks are converted to newlines, styling tags (<div> , <span> , <u> ) are stripped while preserving content, <nowiki> and <code> tags are removed but enclosed text is retained, indentation mark-ers are removed, and whitespace is collapsed and trimmed. MediaWiki templates and external links are preserved to maintain fidelity to the original discussions. The same normalization was applied also to articles. 

B Examples 

Tables 6–10 present one representative example per language from the Wiki-Talkie dataset. Each table shows a discussion thread (including the article ti-tle, thread title, and the sequence of comments), along with the persona profiles of the participants. Due to space constraints, behavioral traits and arti-cles are not shown. 

C Prompts 

We report here the prompts used in this study. Fig-ure 9 shows the prompt for thread revision (Section 3.1). Figures 10, 11, and 13 present the prompts for persona construction (Section 3.1). Figure 12 shows the prompt used for dialog act evaluation (Section 4). Figures 14, 15, 16, and 17 present the prompts used for the conditioning methods (Sec-tion 4). All prompts follow a two-part structure: a 

system prompt establishing the model’s role and output constraints, and a user prompt providing task instructions, definitions, few-shot exemplars where applicable, and the input to process. Place-holders in {braces} are filled at inference time. 

D Data Sample 

Table 3 reports statistics of the sampled data from Wiki-Talkie. English and French are the largest 

> 13 For risks associated with user re-identification, see Ethic Statement Section.

(a) de (b) en 

(c) es (d) fr 

(e) it 

Figure 7: Word distributions for user pages and profiles. 

Total Users with Topics with Gender with Profession with >= 5 Turns Profile Length 

de 6,282 6,213 2,233 1,620 2,983 60.14 ± 27.42 

en 4,580 4,580 3,062 3,038 1,874 98.07 ± 46.22 

es 2,307 1,309 891 446 671 57.07 ± 30.73 

fr 4,952 2,646 2,280 1,494 1,986 64.80 ± 35.23 

it 1,850 1,089 882 381 678 56.06 ± 31.95 

Table 2: Summary statistics of users, their attributes, and activity metrics (mean ± std for profile length). 

Figure 8: Proportion of unavailable trait values across all users, broken down by trait and language. # Comments Avg. Prev. Len ( ± Std) # Unique Users # Men # Women # Men Sent. # Women Sent.                                         

> de 5,187 3.05 ( ±2.59) 564 195 55 1,638 1,212
> en 8,658 3.39 ( ±3.05) 561 296 83 3,268 3,277
> es 4,310 3.03 ( ±2.69) 298 83 20 1,129 458
> fr 9,827 3.29 ( ±2.88) 682 250 61 2,535 2,566
> it 4,706 3.19 ( ±2.92) 325 131 15 1,989 178

Table 3: Statistics of the sampled data used for experiments.            

> Original Label Our Label
> CM, CW, CU, CS, CL, COBJ, CO CRITIQUE
> PSR REQUEST
> PREF REFERENCE
> PFC COMMIT
> PPC REPORT
> IP, IC INFORM
> IS ASK
> ATT+ POSITIVE
> ATT-NEGATIVE
> ATTP PARTIAL

Table 4: Mapping from original SEWD labels (Ferschke et al., 2012) to our dialog act taxonomy. 

splits, with roughly 9–10k comments each. Ger-man, despite starting from the same number of initial threads (5,000), yielded fewer turns after subsampling. Spanish and Italian are roughly half the size of English and French. Thread length is consistent across languages, averaging around 3 previous comments per turn. All languages exhibit a strong male skew in user distribution, consistent with the well-documented gender gap in Wikipedia editorship (Cabrera et al., 2018). The skew is most pronounced in Italian and Spanish, where the lim-ited pool of female editors made gender balancing impossible. English and French are the most bal-anced: in the French split, for instance, male and female editors contribute nearly equal numbers of sentences despite a skewed ratio of unique users. 

E Generation Details 

All next-turn generations were produced using a cloud-based batch inference service. Generations were conducted with a temperature of 0 to ensure deterministic outputs, and a maximum of 1,024 

tokens were generated per response. To accommo-date the context window constraints of each model, input prompts were dynamically truncated when necessary: if the combined length of the system and user prompts exceeded the available input bud-get (i.e., the model’s context window minus the reserved generation tokens), the article body was progressively shortened by iteratively reducing it to 90% of its current length until the prompt fit within the budget, with a <article_truncated> marker appended to signal the truncation. For the history 

method, if the full history caused the prompt to ex-ceed the context window, the number of historical threads was progressively reduced until the prompt fit; instances where the resulting history fell below the minimum threshold of 5 threads were flagged as underrepresented. Prompts that could not be reduced to fit within the context window even after exhausting all truncation strategies were discarded. 

F Validation of Acts Annotation 

To validate our LLM-based annotation approach, we rely on the SEWD dataset (Ferschke et al., 2012). SEWD provides act annotations for En-glish Wikipedia talk page discussions, a setting analogous to Wiki-Talkie corpus. In SEWD, the reconciled labels of two trained annotators serve as the gold standard. We use these reconciled labels to evaluate the quality of our LLM-as-annotator pipeline (the extractor model). For clarity, we re-name and merge some labels to reduce granularity; the full mapping is reported in Table 4. However, the format of SEWD differs substan-tially from Wiki-Talkie. In SEWD, label spans are assigned directly to raw comments within a thread, without prior splitting or cleaning, whereas in our scenario we aim to provide the LLM with preced-ing comments as conversational context and a sin-gle target reply to be labelled. To bridge this gap, we first convert SEWD into the Wiki-Talkie format, structuring each instance as a target comment to be annotated along with its preceding comments as context, and aligning the corresponding SEWD labels. This conversion inevitably introduces noise; we therefore manually clean the resulting instances # Comments Micro-F1 Ask Commit Critique Inform Negative Partial Positive Reference Report Request All 0.74 0.82 0.75 0.77 0.59 0.68 0.35 0.80 0.49 0.97 0.81                                  

> Three 0.74 0.84 0.79 0.78 0.58 0.65 0.19 0.79 0.55 0.98 0.83
> Two 0.76 0.85 0.80 0.81 0.59 0.65 0.42 0.79 0.50 0.97 0.84
> One 0.75 0.83 0.83 0.82 0.59 0.67 0.36 0.78 0.49 0.97 0.84

Table 5: Micro-F1 and F1 scores per label across different training settings.             

> Language: German Page: Diskussion:Schwicheldt (Adelsgeschlecht) Thread: “Bezug”
> User Profile
> 8bfc7f759c Der Benutzer ist seit dem 17. September 2004 bei Wikipedia registriert und feierte am 17. September 2025 seinen 21. Wiki-Geburtstag. Er hat insgesamt rund 284.000 Bearbeitungen vorgenommen, etwa 1100 Artikel verfasst und ungefähr 8400 Fotos hochgeladen. Er ist unter den 8000 aktivsten deutschsprachigen Wikipedianern. Der Benutzer erhielt 2016 den Denkmalpreis ’Silberne Halbkugel’. Er ist Mitglied im Verein Wikimedia Deutschland – Gesellschaft zur Förderung Freien Wissens. Seine Beiträge konzentrieren sich auf Themen wie Bessarabien, den Wolfsburger und Helmstedter/Gifhorner Raum, Hannover, Hann. Münden sowie Archäologie, Geschichte, Burgen, Schlösser, Kirchen und lokale Denkmäler in Niedersachsen.
> 4f3806c190 Der Benutzer ist ein deutscher Muttersprachler mit fortgeschrittenen Englischkenntnissen. Er hat sich am 19. Dezember 2004 bei Wikipedia registriert und kümmert sich hauptsächlich um historischen Bergbau, insbesondere um den Zwickauer Steinkohlenbergbau. Er hat zahlreiche Artikel zu bergbauhistorischen und bergbautechnischen Themen erstellt sowie zu verschiedenen anderen Themen wie Waffen, Militärtechnik und Flugzeugen beigetragen.
> Author Comment
> 8bfc7f759c Besteht ein Bezug zum Ort [[Schwicheldt]]?
> 4f3806c190 Wenn man dem Ortsartikel glauben darf: ja.
> 8bfc7f759c Dann sollte das aber auch im Adelsartikel stehen.

Table 6: German example: persona profiles and thread. 

and discard those that could not be reliably mapped. From the original 1,500 threads in SEWD, this pro-cedure yields 735 usable threads, which constitute our validation set. Since replies in talk page discussions typically do not refer to much earlier context, we experiment with varying amounts of preceding conversational history: all previous comments, up to three, up to two, or only the immediately preceding com-ment. The prompt provided to the LLM includes explanations of each act label together with illus-trative English examples drawn from SEWD. Ta-ble 5 reports the Micro-F1 and per-label F1 scores across these settings. Performance is stable across context windows, with the two-comment setting achieving the highest Micro-F1 (0.77). We there-fore adopt this configuration for all subsequent an-notation. Notably, these scores are very close to the human inter-annotator agreement reported in Fer-schke et al., 2012 (Micro-F1 = 0.79), even though the two evaluation sets are not perfectly overlap-ping: ours is the product of format conversion and manual filtering, whereas the figure in Ferschke et al., 2012 results from cross-validation over the entire SEWD corpus. Nevertheless, this proxim-ity strongly suggests that the LLM approximates human-level labeling quality. Examining the per-label scores, the most chal-lenging categories (F1 < 0.70) are in order P AR -

> TIAL

, and R EFERENCE , N EGATIVE , I NFORM . To better understand these discrepancies, one of the authors of this paper manually inspected 20 in-stances per class where the LLM prediction and the ground truth disagreed. In more than half of the cases, the author judged the LLM label to be more appropriate than the gold label. This pattern may stem from a mismatch between how the act cate-gories are explained in our prompt and how they were originally operationalized in Ferschke et al., 2012 (which is itself likely connected to the rel-atively low inter-annotator agreement reported in that work, arguably a consequence of insufficiently precise annotation guidelines). Language: English Page: Talk:Cleveland Bay Thread: “Merge” 

User Profile 

5f962a065d The user lives in Montana and owns horses. She has been on Wikipedia for a while and works as a small-town lawyer in private practice, which causes her availability to fluctuate. She occasionally writes about legal topics on Wikipedia but prefers other subjects since she does enough legal writing professionally. She also writes books and does freelance writing outside of Wikipedia. She is not compensated for her Wikipedia contributions. She takes photos of objects and locations in Montana, particularly for National Register of Historic Places listings, and uploads them to Commons. She can access documents at the Montana Historical Society. She has met other Wikipedians in person, helped facilitate editathons in Montana, and attended Wikipedia-related events such as WikiConference North America/USA. Her main contributions focus on horse-related articles and Montana-related topics including historic places. 

95725d4ec5 The user is a woman whose main focus on Wikipedia is equine articles, although she also contributes to topics related to history, astronomy, books, endurance sports, the outdoors, and labor unions. She has been doing work on stub sorting, red link recovery, and other cleanup tasks. She is active on and off as a Good Article reviewer and serves as a delegate at Featured article review and as an administrator on Wikipedia. She is married. 

Author Comment 

5f962a065d I’m only wondering if the Chapman horse contributed significantly to anything other than the Cleveland Bay, thus warranting its continued independent article. (Thinking of the Narragansett Pacer or Old English Black horse). Other than that, no problem with the merge, content seems similar in both. 

95725d4ec5 I’ve never found a source that references the Chapman horse in relation to any breed other than the Cleveland Bay. All of the sources I combed through for this article seemed to think that the Chapman was basically the earliest incarnation of the Cleveland Bay, rather than a separate breed that they were descended from. So, I think that the merge is a safe bet, especially since there are no sources in the Chapman article that actually show why the author thought it was a separate breed. 

5f962a065d Groovy. 

Table 7: English example: persona profiles and thread. 

G Full Results 

Tables 11, 12 and Tables 13, 14 report full re-sults for text similarity and interaction behavior evaluation, respectively. Average BERTScore and ROUGE-L scores are discussed in Section 5.1, while average dialog act and sentiment scores are discussed in Section 5.2. Figure 18 reports the pro-portion difference between human and agent dialog acts split by gender, and Figure 19 shows the dis-tributions of sentiment scores for human and agent comments, discussed in Section 5.2. In the fol-lowing, we detail text length and act density ratio, which are not discussed in Section 5. 

Text Length Across all conditions, agent-generated comments are substantially longer than human comments. Human comments average ap-proximately 48–78 words depending on the lan-guage ( de being the shortest at ∼48 words and 

es the longest at ∼78 ), while agent output consis-tently exceeds these figures, often by a wide margin. Notably, the history method yields the shortest agent comments across all models—for instance, Model A drops to ∼88 words on average, its clos-est approximation to human length—suggesting that exposure to real interaction excerpts helps cal-ibrate verbosity. Conversely, the behavior and 

profile methods tend to inflate output length, par-ticularly for Model D and Model B. Interestingly, 

es also elicits slightly longer agent comments than other languages across all conditioning methods, mirroring the fact that human comments in es are themselves the longest. 

Act Density Ratio The act density ratio is con-sistently below 1.0 across all conditions, indicat-ing that agent-generated comments are uniformly richer in communicative intents than their human counterparts. The lowest ratios are observed un-der the behavior method, where agents appear to enact the prescribed behavioral traits, which are dense in prescriptive interactional information. By contrast, when grounded with real examples via history , the ratio rises above 0.7 on average across all models and languages, with the exception of Model B, suggesting that concrete exemplars help bring act density closer to human levels. Language: Spanish Page: Discusión:Calor específico Thread: “Número de citas” 

User Profile 

e1c14a406a El usuario expresa interés en tres áreas principales: la lingüística y las lenguas del mundo, la física matemática y la ingeniería, y la historia económica, economía y sociología. Tiene enlaces a sus páginas de usuario en las Wikipedias en alemán, inglés, francés y portugués. 

94a136608d El usuario es un antiguo bibliotecario peruano que se identifica como miembro de ACAD. Está agradecido con la Wikipedia en español. Sus intereses incluyen Moquegua, las Olimpiadas y la Química. 

4901fd71f4 El usuario es un hombre de Quito, Ecuador, que trabaja para el experimento CMS del CERN. Tiene un doctorado en Física Experimental de Partículas. En el pasado dedicaba mucho tiempo a editar Wikipedia en español, pero actualmente lo hace cuando puede debido a la falta de tiempo libre. Ha contribuido a numerosos artículos relacionados con física, incluyendo mecánica cuántica, teoría de la relatividad, física de partículas y electromagnetismo. 

Author Comment 

e1c14a406a A petición de otro wikipedista leí extensamente el artículo, fijándome en especial en el número de afirmaciones que podrían requerir cita. Aunque las citas son algo deseable y casi siempre necesarias en este caso concreto no veo demasiadas afirmaciones extraordinarias o polémicas que requieran citas. En un artículo sobre temas polémicos las citas son más necesarias, pero creer que todo artículo sea del tema que se requiere el mismo número de citas es erróneo. En este caso el artículo trata de un tema de ciencia convencional muy asentado que podríamos considerar un tema ya muy asentado, en ese caso creo que al artículo no le faltan ya más citas. Tener citas por tener citas, no garantiza la calidad o correcta referenciación del artículo, el número de citas debe depender el tipo de artículo, la temática y lo polémico del tema. Mi apreciación es que en este caso el artículo tiene el número de citas adecuadas. En cualquier caso si alguien considera que no es así debería añadir QUÉ afirmaciones concretas considera que deben ser referenciadas. 

94a136608d Hola, revisa arriba y están las frases que necesitan referencias y también lee [[WP:FP]]. 

4901fd71f4 Hola Fide... bueno he puesto referencias a las afirmaciones que dices que faltaban, me faltan solo las dos ultimas que no encuentro. Por el formato de las referencias, eso ya lo arregle. Espero que con eso sea suficiente. (Y vamos que no es un nominado para destacado!!) Saludos 

94a136608d Disculpame si te parezco exigente, pero según [[WP:SAB]]: {{cita|- Califica cuidadosamente. -¡Los estándares de los Artículos buenos son tan altos como aquellos del calificador más indulgente!|[[WP:SAB]]}} Pero créeme, te va a salir un superBueno, de lo mejor, y si esas frases no fueran un poquito dudosas, ni las mencionaría. Bendiciones. 

4901fd71f4 Si entiendo tu postura Fide, solo no entendi lo del superbueno??? Saludos y seguiré buscando las referencias. 

94a136608d Era solo un decir. Saludos 

Table 8: Spanish example: persona profiles and thread. 

H Information Density vs. Information Type 

A natural concern with our experimental design is that the comparison across conditioning meth-ods may not be fully information-balanced: the 

history method receives 5–20 raw prior com-ments, whereas profile and behavior receive compressed summaries. Part of the gain observed under history could therefore reflect a larger con-text budget (i.e., information quantity ) rather than a strictly better form of persona representation, i.e., information type .To probe this confound, we examine how per-formance varies with the amount of conditioning information provided. We focus this analysis on 

profile length, where the available token bud-get varies meaningfully across users (see Table 2 and Figure 7). For history , the analogous analy-sis would require comparing performance across different numbers of prior comments. However, the history sampler defaults to using up to 20 comments per user, and in practice the vast major-ity of conditioning pools fall in the 16–20 range; lower-comment buckets are too sparsely populated to support a meaningful comparison. We therefore restrict the analysis to profile length, which pro-vides a well-distributed and interpretable proxy for input richness. We stratify all experimental instances by 

profile word count into five buckets (1–50, 51– 100, 101–150, 151–200, 201–250) and compute, Language: French Page: Discussion:Pfalz-ardenner/Bon article Thread: (untitled) 

User Profile 

702383d34d L’utilisateur a commencé à contribuer sur Wikipédia en décembre 2006. Il se décrit comme un wikignome à ses heures perdues et travaille principalement sur des articles liés à la physique nucléaire, aux accélérateurs de particules, aux biographies de scientifiques et à l’Irlande. Il a significativement contribué à des articles sur la capture électronique, la désintégration du neutron libre et les noyaux p. 

d637e7f14a L’utilisatrice est une femme inscrite sur Wikipédia depuis 2007. Elle est une contributrice très active, ayant lancé environ 230 propositions de labellisation d’articles, dont 83% concernent le cheval. Elle a participé à plusieurs publications scientifiques. Ses domaines de contribution principaux sont les créatures légendaires (fées, lutins, malebestes), les chevaux (aspects culturels, sociologiques et génétiques), et l’autisme. Elle s’intéresse de plus en plus à la génétique. Elle apprécie les tableaux préraphaélites. Depuis 2017, elle pratique la photographie animalière comme hobby, cherchant à photographier un maximum d’espèces et de races animales. Elle préfère être tutoyée. 

75d8423c61 L’utilisateur est passionné de sport automobile, plus particulièrement d’endurance. Il est né le jour du Grand Prix automobile du Portugal 1995. Il s’intéresse aux histoires oubliées du sport automobile. Sur Wikipédia, il contribue activement en créant et améliorant de nombreux articles liés au sport automobile, notamment sur les automobiles de course, les courses d’endurance, les écuries, les pilotes, ainsi que sur d’autres sujets comme la course au large, le football, l’histoire militaire et l’architecture. 

Author Comment 

702383d34d Très beau travail de recherche {{u-|user_d637e7f14a}}. Je n’ai fait que survoler l’article mais une remarque me vient au passage. Étant donné que quasiment toutes les sources sont en anglais ou en allemand, d’où vient le nom en français de cette race. Est-ce qu’il est mentionné dans Guide des chevaux d’Europe qui est la seule source en français ? Ou bien est-ce qu’il s’agit de ta propre traduction ? Je demande cela car les seuls résultats que je trouve sur le Web pour ce mot proviennent de Wikipédia ou de clones. 

d637e7f14a Merci pour la question user_702383d34d. Le Guide des chevaux d’Europe a gardé le nom allemand, ce qui est surprenant car toutes les autres races allemandes ont un nom traduit. J’ai tenté une traduction littérale (d’abord « du Palatinat », puis « palatin ») en début de travail, mais je peux retourner à 

Pfalz-ardenner , qui effectivement est la seule référence attestée dans un bouquin en français 

702383d34d En fait, je ne sais pas comment on gère ça sur Wikipédia habituellement. Ça ne me dérange pas outre mesure de franciser le nom, mais à minima, je pense qu’il faudrait indiquer dans une note que c’est une traduction « personnelle » (je n’ai pas trop d’idée sur la meilleure façon de faire). Peut-être faut-il garder le nom en allemand et indiquer en note, ta traduction en français. Peut-être que les autres votants ont un avis sur la question. 

75d8423c61 Si le titre de l’article est une traduction personnelle, alors il vaut mieux renommer l’article. Pour garder le [[WP:PMS]]. Peut-être écrire la traduction dans une note où la traduire dans l’intro. Mais il faut renommer 

75d8423c61 Merci, c’est mieux comme ça ! 

Table 9: French example: persona profiles and thread. 

for each bucket and for each language–model pair, the four metrics used in our main analysis: ROUGE-L, rBERT, dialog act JSD, and sentiment JSD. Buckets with fewer than 20 samples are omit-ted, so de has no 201–250 bucket and es no 151– 200 bucket. The es 201–250 bucket is dominated by a single user, who contributes 45 of its 67 sam-ples, so its values should be read as largely indi-vidual rather than bucket-level. Results are shown in Figures 20–23. The red dashed lines indicate the proportion of samples falling in each bucket; trends at the longest bucket should be interpreted with caution due to sample sparsity. 

Findings Across all 20 language–model pairs, none of the four metrics improves consistently as 

profile length grows. A pure context-budget ac-count would predict a downward slope for JSD metrics (lower divergence = better alignment) and an upward slope for similarity metrics (higher = better) as more conditioning tokens are provided. ROUGE-L and rBERT are nearly horizontal in ev-ery configuration (within-pair ranges of at most 

0.026 and 0.044 , respectively). Where the JSD metrics do move, they mostly move in the opposite 

direction: dialog act JSD rises for all four models in fr , mainly from the 151–200 bucket onward, and sentiment JSD rises with profile length for all four models in es , fr , and it . The few downward trends are small and confined to en and de : dialog act JSD for Model A in en decreases from 0.135 to 0.098 , and sentiment JSD decreases for some models in en and de , in en largely because of the sparse 1–50 bucket (under 3% of samples). Taken together, these results provide evidence against an information-density explanation for our main results. Together with the observa-tion reported in the main text—that profile de-grades performance relative to base despite adding tokens—this analysis supports our interpretation that information type , not information quantity ,drives the differences across conditioning methods. We acknowledge that this analysis does not fully isolate every possible confound (e.g., compression-induced loss of stylistic exemplars), and we discuss this further in the Limitations. 

I Qualitative Audit of Profiles and Behavioral Traits 

Because profiles and behavioral traits are produced automatically by an LLM and then used as the key conditioning signals for profile , behavior ,and behavior+r , their quality directly affects the interpretation of downstream results. To comple-ment the quantitative analyses in the main text, we conducted a manual audit of these representations along three dimensions: (i) relevance and faith-fulness of generated profiles with respect to the source user pages, (ii) coherence between assigned behavioral traits and the supporting reasoning pro-duced by the extractor model, and (iii) privacy preservation , i.e., whether sensitive information (real names, usernames, contacts) is leaked into the generated representations. We sampled 10 users per language (50 total) uniformly at random from the experimental subset and one of the authors in-spected, for each user, the generated profile, all 8 behavioral traits with their reasoning, and the underlying user page. 

Profile faithfulness In all 50 cases, profiles con-tain information that is relevant to and supported by the source user page. We identified a small number of imprecisions, none of which substantially distort the persona: • English: one numerical drift (“42 years” instead of “45 years”); one rounding error on edit count (“100,000” instead of “100,000k”); • French: one case where contributed-article in-formation was omitted; • German: one case where the username was in-corporated into the profile as if it were a separate entity, likely due to hallucination triggered by user page ambiguity; • Italian: one ungrammatical fragment (“Ha adot-tato il giorno 16 luglio e il comune di Plesio”) reflecting parsing ambiguity in the user page. We additionally observed that information from 

userboxes —small standardized templates that Wikipedia editors place on their user pages to de-clare interests, languages spoken, locations, or affiliations—is sometimes incorporated into the profile and sometimes ignored, with no clear pat-tern across languages. Moreover, we noticed that gender, when not explicitly self-declared, is typ-ically inferred from gender-marked terms (espe-cially in the four grammatical-gender languages: German, Spanish, French, and Italian) and, when available, from given names. 

Behavioral trait coherence For each of the 8 behavioral categories, we checked whether the as-signed trait value is consistent with the accompany-ing reasoning. Out of 50 × 8 = 400 trait-reasoning pairs, in only 7 cases (across English, Spanish, and Italian) was the assigned label found to trace back to the provided reasoning. In most other cases, the reasoning explicitly cites concrete excerpts from the user’s comment history in support of the as-signed trait, providing transparent grounding for the conditioning signal. 

Privacy The audit surfaced two cases that war-rant explicit mention: • one English profile mentioning a middle name, which the user themselves had self-disclosed anecdotally on their user page; • one German profile reproducing the username as if it were a separate named entity (the same hallucination case noted above). No real legal names, contact details, or other di-rectly identifying information were leaked into the generated representations. 

Implications for downstream results The au-dit indicates that the generated profiles and behav-ioral traits are largely faithful and well-grounded, with imprecisions concentrated at the level of iso-lated factual details rather than systematic distor-tions. This argues against an interpretation in which the relatively weak performance of profile and 

behavior is driven primarily by representation quality. At the same time, the audit highlights that profiles vary substantially in the kinds of informa-tion they emphasize (e.g., uneven uptake of userbox content) and that the compression step inherent in summarization may lose stylistic exemplars present in the raw history signal. In this sense, our results should be read as conclusions about the condition-ing representations as we generated them , rather than as universal statements about all possible so-ciodemographic descriptors. We acknowledge this scope explicitly in the Limitations. Language: Italian Page: Discussione:Nevicata del 1985 Thread: “Leggiamo l’articolo” 

User Profile 

6aa9673768 L’utente si è registrato su Wikipedia l’8 agosto 2006. Contribuisce principalmente nell’ambito delle voci scientifiche, con particolare attenzione alle Scienze della Terra, e interviene anche su voci riguardanti storiografia, filosofia e cinema, che sono sue vecchie passioni. È anche appassionato di fotografia e inserisce immagini originali di sua produzione. Partecipa al Progetto sulle persecuzioni, deportazioni e crimini del periodo nazi-fascista, in particolare sul tema del Negazionismo dell’Olocausto. È amministratore di Wikipedia dal 2007. 

677e695641 L’utente è un uomo over 60, curioso e intellettualmente aperto a nuovi apprendimenti. Si appassiona in particolare a temi concernenti diritto, letteratura, musica e scienze politiche. Si è registrato su Wikipedia verso la fine di febbraio 2006. È laureato in Giurisprudenza. Vive a La Spezia. Su Wikipedia ha creato o modificato consistentemente voci riguardanti società, diritto, economia, storia, istituzioni, politica, musica, letteratura, arte, religione, filosofia e sport. 

1363852f3c L’utente è attivo su Wikipedia dal 21 agosto 2006, quando ha effettuato la sua prima modifica. L’11 febbraio 2008 è stato eletto amministratore. Ha raggiunto diversi traguardi di contributi: 100 edit il 24 marzo 2007, 500 il 19 giugno 2007, 1000 il 21 luglio 2007, 2000 l’8 agosto 2007, 4000 il 22 settembre 2007, 5000 il 17 ottobre 2007, 7500 il 18 gennaio 2008, 10000 il 13 aprile 2008 e 20000 il 16 aprile 2009. Ha creato 100 nuove voci entro il 21 ottobre 2007. Contribuisce principalmente ad articoli sulla musica punk, hardcore punk, gruppi musicali e album, con particolare attenzione a band come Less Than Jake, Dropkick Murphys, Misfits, Sick of It All, Weezer e alla scena hardcore svedese. 

Author Comment 

6aa9673768 Nell’ ultimo intervento user_677e695641 ha richiesto di inserire una citazione gia’ presente da almeno una settimana nelle fonti/bibliografia. Questo mi fa sospettare che i suoi interventi e commenti non sia preceduti da una corretta/completa lettura della voce. Lascio a chi legge i commenti del caso. 

677e695641 Hai ragione, scusa: avevo letto più volte l’articolo ma non avevo ancora aperto il link a quell’articolo (Nimbus) che usa questo appellativo di “nevicata del secolo” (mi pare l’unico caso, ma comunque esiste), anche se di norma con nevicata del secolo l’opinione pubblica pensa a quella del ’56. 

1363852f3c Visto che l’articolo linkato parla di “Nevicata del Secolo” riferendosi però solo alla città di Milano o, comunque, solo al settentrione, potremmo, nel caso in cui si decidesse per l’unificazione delle pagine, mantenere la nomencaltura “Nevicata del Secolo” per l’eventuale paragrafo di approfondimento sulla situazione nel Nord Italia. qualcosa del tipo La “Nevicata del Secolo” di Milano . Che ne dite? 

677e695641 Il punto è che mi convince poco l’uso di iperboli e di espressioni altisonanti, tipo “nevicata del secolo”. Inoltre, pare che di nevicate del secolo ce ne siano state più di una (leggi la disambigua [[Nevicata del secolo]]). 

6aa9673768 La disambigua di cui sopra e’ stata creata da user_677e695641 appositamente per poter affermare che ci sono piu’ nevicate secolari, il che e’ una ovvieta’ e verita’ statistica: ogni zona d’ Italia ha avuto la sua nevicata secolare. Riguardo alla iperbole si rimanda all’ articolo citato qui’ sopra 

677e695641 La disambigua non è stata creata appositamente per poter affermare che ci sono piu’ nevicate secolari ,ma proprio perchè l’esistenza di più fenomeni chiamati “nevicata del secolo” - come lo stesso user_6aa9673768 riconosce - è una ovvietà e verità statistica : caso classico in cui una disambigua si impone. Suggerirei, se mi è consentito, di usare toni meno polemici e più legati al merito delle questioni. 

Table 10: Italian example: persona profiles and thread. System Prompt You are an expert in analyzing Wikipedia Talk pages written in {language} .You deeply understand: • how Wikipedia discussions are structured • how user signatures and timestamps work • how informal, unstructured talk-page conversations appear You must correct errors produced by automatic splitting of Wikipedia discussions. You always follow the output format rules exactly and never add explanations. User Prompt I am processing Wikipedia Talk page conversations written in {language} .These conversations were automatically split into comments using heuristics (mainly assigning each comment to the last detected user signature). Because Talk pages are informal and unstructured, these heuristics sometimes produce incorrect splits. You are given JSON data that includes: • thread : the automatically split discussion (may contain errors) • free_form_thread : the original unstructured conversation (ground truth) Your task is to determine whether thread correctly reflects the structure and speaker attribution implied by free_form_thread , and to fix it if possible. ### DECISION PROCEDURE 1. Compare thread against free_form_thread .2. If speaker attribution or comment boundaries cannot be determined with high confidence, output exactly: {} 

3. Otherwise, apply only the minimal necessary fixes to the thread field. 4. If no fixes are required, return the input thread field unchanged. ### OUTPUT RULES 1. Output ONLY valid JSON. 2. Output must contain ONLY the thread field. If attribution is too ambiguous, output exactly {} .3. Modify the thread field ONLY IF a fix is clearly justified. 4. Do NOT reformat text, normalize whitespace, alter punctuation, or modify timestamps. 5. Preserve all comment text verbatim except when removing a clearly identifiable trailing user signature. 6. Do NOT add, infer, guess, merge, split, reorder, or rewrite content except as explicitly permitted below. ### TYPES OF ERRORS TO FIX 1. Merged comments (missing signatures) Multiple distinct users’ comments may be merged into a single entry. Fix ONLY if distinct speakers are clearly identifiable and comment boundaries are unambiguous. If signatures are missing or attribution is uncertain, output {} .

[ Few-shot examples: one merge fix, two ambiguous cases outputting {} ]

2. Post-signature edits (post scriptum) Text added after a user signature should belong to the preceding comment, not the following one. 

[ Few-shot example ] 

3. Trailing signature not removed If a comment still contains its own signature at the end, remove only the signature text. 

[ Few-shot example ] 

4. Already correct thread If thread already matches the structure implied by free_form_thread , return it unchanged. 

[ Few-shot example ] 

### ACTUAL INPUT INPUT: {input_row} 

OUTPUT: 

Figure 9: Prompt template for thread split revision. Few-shot example content is summarized for brevity. System Prompt You extract explicit personal information from Wikipedia user pages written in {language} .Follow the user prompt exactly. If information is missing or unclear, use “unknown”. Always output exactly one valid JSON object and nothing else. Do not add explanations, comments, or formatting outside the JSON. User Prompt You are given the full text of a Wikipedia user page written in {language} .The page may contain explicit self-declared information about the user (background, personal traits, interests), or it may contain only irrelevant content or no personal information at all. ## TASK 1. Determine whether the page contains any explicit personal information about the user. 2. If yes: a. Write a natural-language profile containing that information. b. Extract the information into the structured fields below. ## DEFINITION Personal information includes only what the user explicitly states about themselves, such as: • Background or biographical details • Gender or age • Location (origin or residence, if explicitly stated) • Languages spoken • Education and profession • Interests or hobbies • Wikipedia-related activity (e.g., registration year, preferred topics, articles edited or created) ## RULES (STRICT) • Use only information explicitly stated on the user page; do NOT invent anything. • Do NOT include names, usernames, email addresses, or contact details in the profile. • Information in structured fields must be in English, except profile , which must be written in {language} .• If a field is missing or unclear, use “unknown”. • If no personal information is present, set relevant_page to false .• Output exactly one valid JSON object and nothing else. ## FIELDS TO OUTPUT 

relevant_page : Boolean; true if any explicit personal information is present. 

profile : Natural-language description in {language} , third person, no names, no full birth dates (birth years only). "" if relevant_page is false .

gender : "man" , "woman" , "non-binary" , "unknown" . Infer from explicit statements or grammatical gender cues; do NOT infer from names. 

age_range : "under 18" , "18–30" , "31–40" , "41–60" , "over 60" , "unknown" . Only if explicitly stated. 

location : Country or city explicitly stated as place of residence; "unknown" if absent. 

known_languages : Languages explicitly stated; names in English. [] if absent. 

education_level : "no formal education" , "high school" , "undergraduate" , "graduate" , "postgraduate" , "unknown" . Only if explicitly stated. 

study_field : Field associated with education, in English; "unknown" otherwise. 

profession : Explicitly stated profession, in English; "unknown" if absent. 

hobbies : Explicitly stated recreational activities, in English. [] if absent. 

stated_interests : Topics explicitly declared as interests or stated editing focus, in English. [] if absent. 

registration_year : Wikipedia registration year if explicitly stated; "unknown" otherwise. 

contribution_topics : Abstract topic categories derived from article lists explicitly present on the page, in English. [] if absent. ## EXAMPLE INPUT: {user_page_true} 

OUTPUT: {profile_true} 

INPUT: {user_page_false} 

OUTPUT: {profile_false} 

## ACTUAL INPUT INPUT: {input_row} 

OUTPUT: 

Figure 10: Prompt template for user page profiling. System Prompt You are an AI assistant specialized in analyzing Wikipedia editor behavior. Your task is to extract editorial decision policies and interactional style traits from a user’s comments on Wikipedia Talk pages written in {language} .Focus on observable, repeatable patterns in: • how the user argues and frames disagreement • how the user moderates or enforces norms • how the user structures Talk Page comments • how the user applies Wikipedia policies and guidelines • interactional style traits (e.g., hedging vs. assertiveness, politeness markers, escalation threshold) • writing style features that influence discussion dynamics (e.g., formal vs. informal register, use of emphasis such as bold or italics, structured formatting, rhetorical questions, or inclusion of emojis or informal symbols) Base all conclusions strictly on explicit evidence in the provided data. Do not generalize beyond recurring, observable patterns. If evidence is missing, conflicting, or insufficient, set "value" to ["Not-deducible"] .Always output exactly one valid JSON object and nothing else. Do not include explanations or formatting outside the JSON. User Prompt (1/2) You are given a set of Wikipedia Talk threads containing comments in {language} authored by the user {username} .

<Comments> {threads} </Comments> 

## TASK Analyze the data to extract {username} ’s editorial decision policies and interactional style traits , capturing how they typically behave and contribute in Wikipedia discussions. Focus on how {username} :• frames disagreements • applies policies • structures arguments • interacts with other editors • seeks (or resists) consensus ## STRICT RULES • Base your analysis only on observable evidence from the provided comments authored by {username} . Comments from other users are context only. • Do NOT invent motivations, beliefs, or background. • Do not generalize beyond recurring, observable patterns. If evidence is missing, conflicting, or insufficient, set "value" to ["Not-deducible"] .• Output must be exactly one valid JSON object. • Do NOT add any text outside the JSON. ## EDITORIAL BEHAVIORAL FEATURES TO EXTRACT For each field, provide: • "value" : a list of values selected from the allowed options. You can select one or multiple options. • "reasoning" : brief, evidence-based justification (2–3 sentences max). ### 1. Tone Management How the user manages tone in discussions. Allowed values: Neutral and procedural , Conciliatory and polite , Firm and directive , Confrontational , Not-deducible .### 2. Consensus Orientation How the user approaches consensus-building. Allowed values: Actively seeks compromise , Willing to compromise with conditions , Defends position until consensus shifts , Prioritizes enforcement over consensus , Not-deducible .### 3. Agreement Strategy How the user typically responds when agreeing. Allowed values: Explicit endorsement with reasoning , Brief affirmation , Conditional agreement , Agreement with modification proposal , Neutral acknowledgment , Not-deducible .### 4. Disagreement Strategy How the user typically responds when disagreeing and critiquing work done by other users or their opinions. Allowed values: Clarification-seeking , Policy-based objection , Assertion of violation , Compromise-oriented , De-escalation-focused , Not-deducible .

Figure 11: Prompt template for editorial behavior extraction (system prompt and user prompt, part 1). System Prompt You are an expert annotator who tags discussion turns in Wikipedia talk pages in {language} with dialog act labels. Each turn can have multiple labels. You must read the conversation context carefully and assign all relevant labels to a given target turn. Do not explain your reasoning, return only the labels as a comma-separated list. Be precise and consistent with the label definitions. User Prompt You are provided with a comment in {language} to label with dialog acts. It can receive multiple labels. In the following, you can find the label set and their definitions. Return the label names EXACTLY as written. ## Labels CRITIQUE Use this when a comment explicitly criticizes something. This can include the current article content, prior edits, structure, style, accuracy, completeness, neutrality, or clarity. Key signals: points out errors, says content is lacking, inaccurate, poorly structured, non-neutral. 

Example: “This section on the filmography is incomplete and lacks reliable sources.” 

REQUEST Use this when a comment contains a suggestion, recommendation, or explicit request for action. Key signals: suggests, recommends, asks to add/remove/change something. 

Example: “We should add a citation for this paragraph.” 

REFERENCE Use this when a comment points to an external source or Wikipedia page without requesting action. Key signals: mentions [[Wikipedia page]], cites URL, provides a pointer to a guideline. 

Example: “See [[WP:NPOV]] for more information.” 

COMMIT Use this when an editor states an intention to act in the future. Key signals: “I will...”, “I plan to...”, “I intend to...”. 

Example: “I will update the article tomorrow.” 

REPORT Use this when an editor reports that an action has already been performed. Key signals: “I added...”, “I changed...”, “I corrected...”, {{done}} .

Example: “I just added the missing reference.” 

INFORM Use this label when a comment provides information, factual details, or corrections to other editors’ understanding. Key signals: shares knowledge, clarifies, corrects misinformation. 

Example: “The population of Paris is 2.1 million according to the latest census.” 

ASK Use this when a comment asks for information or clarification. Key signals: “Does anyone know...?”, “Can someone explain...?”, “What is the source...?” 

Example: “Can someone provide a source for this statement?” 

POSITIVE Use this when a comment expresses agreement, thanks, congratulations, or appreciation toward another editor. Key signals: agrees, thanks, congratulates, supports another editor’s point. 

Example: “Thanks for adding this, I agree with your suggestion.” 

NEGATIVE Use this when a comment expresses disagreement, rejection, or complaint toward another editor or their edit proposals. Key signals: disagrees, rejects ( {{notdone}} ), complains, criticizes another editor (not the article). 

Example: “I disagree with this change; it introduces errors.” 

PARTIAL Use this when a comment both acknowledges and partially rejects another editor’s point (a mixture of POSITIVE and NEGATIVE). Key signals: agrees with some points, but disagrees or partially rejects others. 

Example: “I agree with your point, but I think this part still needs work.” 

## Task • Assign all relevant labels to ‘comment_to_label’ • You are provided with up to the two most recent previous comments and the thread title for context • Return them as a comma-separated list • Do not include explanations, reasoning, or additional text 

{exemplars} 

### Data 

{data_to_label} 

### Labels 

Figure 12: Prompt template for dialog act labeling. User Prompt (2/2) ### 5. Informing Strategy What the user provides in support of their claims (knowledge, sources, or article excerpts). Allowed values: Personal knowledge or expertise claims , Citation of Wikipedia policies or guidelines , External reliable sources , Article text excerpts or diffs , Logical or procedural reasoning , Not-deducible .### 6. Policy Usage How the user uses Wikipedia policies and guidelines. Allowed values: Frequent explicit citation , Occasional citation , Implicit norm-based reasoning , Rare or no policy reference , Not-deducible .### 7. Editing Behavior How the user reports edits or willingness to edit or request edits. Allowed values (select all that apply): Proposes specific edits , Performs edits and reports them , Requests others to edit , Recommends reverts or closures ,

Avoids editing and focuses on discussion , Not-deducible .### 8. Writing Style and Comment Structure Typical structure of the user’s Talk Page comments and style. Allowed values (select all that apply): Long, detailed comments , Short, concise comments , Bullet-pointed structure , Question-led structure , Action-oriented closings , Informal conversational tone , Formal procedural tone , Includes emojis or informal symbols , Polite or hedging language , Assertive or directive language , Not-deducible .## OUTPUT FORMAT Provide ONLY valid JSON using the following structure: 

{output_template} 

Figure 13: Prompt template for editorial behavior extraction (user prompt, part 2). 

System Prompt You are participating as {user} , a Wikipedia editor, in a Wikipedia Talk Page discussion. You are proficient with Wikipedia guidelines and formatting conventions, including: • External links: [https://example.com Description] 

• Internal links: [[Article title]] or [[Article title|display text]] 

• Policy and guideline references: [[WP:NPOV]] , [[WP:V]] , [[WP:OR]] , [[WP:RS]] 

• Templates: {{template name}} 

• Emphasis markup ( ”’bold”’ , ”italics” )• List formatting: * for bulleted lists, # for numbered lists You generate the next comment in {language} for the discussion, using Wikipedia formatting where appropriate. User Prompt You are provided with the article “ {article_title} ” and a discussion titled “ {thread_title} ” about it. ## Wikipedia Article 

{article} 

—## Target Discussion 

{previous_comments} 

Given the target discussion above, generate the next comment in {language} at timestamp {timestamp} as {user} , coherently and logically continuing the discussion so far. Do not refer to being an AI assistant, do not include meta-commentary, and do not add signatures ( ∼∼∼∼ ) or timestamps. Output only the comment itself. 

Figure 14: Prompt template for base .System Prompt You are participating as {user} , a Wikipedia editor, in a Wikipedia Talk Page discussion. You are proficient with Wikipedia guidelines and formatting conventions, including: • External links: [https://example.com Description] 

• Internal links: [[Article title]] or [[Article title|display text]] 

• Policy and guideline references: [[WP:NPOV]] , [[WP:V]] , [[WP:OR]] , [[WP:RS]] 

• Templates: {{template name}} 

• Emphasis markup ( ”’bold”’ , ”italics” )• List formatting: * for bulleted lists, # for numbered lists You generate the next comment in {language} for the discussion, using Wikipedia formatting where appropriate. You must adapt your expertise, reasoning, communication style, and tone to fully align with your profile below. This includes tailoring both the level and domain of knowledge demonstrated in your responses to match the documented attributes and characteristics in your profile. ## Profile 

{user_information} 

User Prompt You are provided with the article “ {article_title} ” and a discussion titled “ {thread_title} ” about it. ## Wikipedia Article 

{article} 

—## Target Discussion 

{previous_comments} 

Given the target discussion above, generate the next comment in {language} at timestamp {timestamp} as {user} , coherently and logically continuing the discussion so far. The comment must reflect the documented attributes in your profile. Do not refer to being an AI assistant, do not include meta-commentary, and do not add signatures ( ∼∼∼∼ ) or timestamps. Output only the comment itself. 

Figure 15: Prompt template for profile .

System Prompt You are participating as {user} , a Wikipedia editor, in a Wikipedia Talk Page discussion. You are proficient with Wikipedia guidelines and formatting conventions, including: • External links: [https://example.com Description] 

• Internal links: [[Article title]] or [[Article title|display text]] 

• Policy and guideline references: [[WP:NPOV]] , [[WP:V]] , [[WP:OR]] , [[WP:RS]] 

• Templates: {{template name}} 

• Emphasis markup ( ”’bold”’ , ”italics” )• List formatting: * for bulleted lists, # for numbered lists You generate the next comment in {language} for the discussion, using Wikipedia formatting where appropriate. You must adapt your reasoning, communication style, and tone to fully align with the interaction traits provided below. This includes tailoring your interactions and communication to match the documented traits. ## Traits 

{user_information} 

User Prompt You are provided with the article “ {article_title} ” and a discussion titled “ {thread_title} ” about it. ## Wikipedia Article 

{article} 

—## Target Discussion 

{previous_comments} 

Given the target discussion above, generate the next comment in {language} at timestamp {timestamp} as {user} , coherently and logically continuing the discussion so far. The comment must reflect your documented interaction traits, both in editorial decisions and in interaction style. Do not refer to being an AI assistant, do not include meta-commentary, and do not add signatures ( ∼∼∼∼ ) or timestamps. Output only the comment itself. 

Figure 16: Prompt template for behavior ({user_information} without reasoning) and behavior+r 

({user_information} with reasoning). System Prompt You are participating as {user} , a Wikipedia editor, in a Wikipedia Talk Page discussion. You are proficient with Wikipedia guidelines and formatting conventions, including: • External links: [https://example.com Description] 

• Internal links: [[Article title]] or [[Article title|display text]] 

• Policy and guideline references: [[WP:NPOV]] , [[WP:V]] , [[WP:OR]] , [[WP:RS]] 

• Templates: {{template name}} 

• Emphasis markup ( ”’bold”’ , ”italics” )• List formatting: * for bulleted lists, # for numbered lists You generate the next comment in {language} for the discussion, using Wikipedia formatting where appropriate. You must adapt your expertise, reasoning, communication style, and tone to be consistent with your own comments across other threads. User Prompt You are provided with the article “ {article_title} ” and a discussion titled “ {thread_title} ” about it. ## Wikipedia Article 

{article} 

—In the following section you can find your history, that is, other threads where you wrote comments as {user} .## User History 

{history} 

—## Target Discussion 

{previous_comments} 

Given the target discussion above, generate the next comment in {language} at timestamp {timestamp} as {user} , coherently and logically continuing the discussion so far. The comment must reflect the expertise, reasoning, communication style, and tone demonstrated in your user history. Do not refer to being an AI assistant, do not include meta-commentary, and do not add signatures ( ∼∼∼∼ ) or timestamps. Output only the comment itself. 

Figure 17: Prompt template for history .

Figure 18: Proportion difference between human and agent dialog acts split across genders. Positive values indicate human over-production; negative values indicate agent over-production. (a) Model A under base method. (b) Model B under base method.   

> (c) Model B under history method.

Figure 19: Sentiment scores distributions for human agent comments on en for selected models and conditioning methods. Setup Lang Model Avg Human Words Avg Agent Words BERT ↑ rBERT ↑ ROUGE ↑

base de 

Model A 47.9 (56.3) 80.2 (34.2) 0.849 0.065 0.096 Model B 47.7 (56.3) 205.1 (74.3) 0.822 -0.102 0.061 Model C 47.9 (56.3) 87.7 (32.5) 0.847 0.051 0.088 Model D 47.9 (56.3) 121.7 (47.4) 0.837 -0.013 0.077 

Avg models 47.8 ± 0.1 123.7 ± 57.2 0.839 ± 0.012 0.000 ± 0.076 0.081 ± 0.015 

en 

Model A 62.4 (78.7) 105.4 (54.3) 0.854 0.013 0.124 Model B 62.4 (78.7) 251.1 (109.2) 0.832 -0.140 0.085 Model C 62.4 (78.7) 105.7 (46.7) 0.852 -0.001 0.120 Model D 62.4 (78.7) 132.2 (54.7) 0.843 -0.065 0.101 

Avg models 62.4 ± 0.0 148.6 ± 69.5 0.845 ± 0.010 -0.048 ± 0.070 0.107 ± 0.018 

es 

Model A 77.5 (96.5) 113.8 (49.6) 0.852 0.050 0.132 Model B 77.5 (96.8) 270.0 (92.8) 0.829 -0.099 0.094 Model C 77.5 (96.5) 116.4 (52.1) 0.851 0.039 0.129 Model D 77.5 (96.5) 152.4 (60.2) 0.842 -0.014 0.115 

Avg models 77.5 ± 0.0 163.1 ± 73.4 0.844 ± 0.011 -0.006 ± 0.068 0.118 ± 0.017 

fr 

Model A 63.9 (77.2) 100.7 (42.5) 0.851 0.061 0.117 Model B 63.9 (77.2) 238.0 (82.1) 0.828 -0.086 0.083 Model C 63.9 (77.2) 107.6 (45.6) 0.849 0.048 0.110 Model D 63.9 (77.2) 141.6 (55.9) 0.840 -0.009 0.100 

Avg models 63.9 ± 0.0 147.0 ± 63.3 0.842 ± 0.011 0.004 ± 0.067 0.103 ± 0.015 

it 

Model A 64.1 (79.1) 93.5 (42.8) 0.847 0.075 0.097 Model B 64.1 (78.3) 227.8 (76.8) 0.824 -0.065 0.069 Model C 64.1 (79.1) 91.6 (34.1) 0.847 0.072 0.094 Model D 64.1 (79.1) 139.2 (56.1) 0.838 0.016 0.084 

Avg models 64.1 ± 0.0 138.0 ± 63.8 0.839 ± 0.011 0.025 ± 0.066 0.086 ± 0.013 Avg langs 

Model A 63.1 ± 10.5 98.7 ± 12.7 0.851 ± 0.003 0.053 ± 0.024 0.113 ± 0.016 

Model B 63.1 ± 10.6 238.4 ± 24.4 0.827 ± 0.004 -0.098 ± 0.027 0.078 ± 0.013 

Model C 63.1 ± 10.5 101.8 ± 11.9 0.849 ± 0.002 0.042 ± 0.027 0.108 ± 0.017 

Model D 63.1 ± 10.5 137.4 ± 11.4 0.840 ± 0.003 -0.017 ± 0.030 0.096 ± 0.015 

profile de 

Model A 47.9 (56.3) 94.8 (38.9) 0.847 0.053 0.094 Model B 47.8 (56.3) 207.4 (68.9) 0.821 -0.112 0.060 Model C 47.9 (56.3) 98.2 (32.2) 0.845 0.041 0.085 Model D 47.9 (56.3) 165.6 (62.2) 0.832 -0.044 0.072 

Avg models 47.9 ± 0.0 141.5 ± 54.7 0.836 ± 0.012 -0.016 ± 0.077 0.078 ± 0.015 

en 

Model A 62.4 (78.7) 122.7 (60.7) 0.852 -0.003 0.119 Model B 62.5 (78.9) 263.5 (99.9) 0.830 -0.154 0.081 Model C 62.4 (78.7) 120.7 (48.8) 0.850 -0.017 0.115 Model D 62.4 (78.7) 180.1 (70.2) 0.837 -0.105 0.091 

Avg models 62.4 ± 0.0 171.7 ± 67.1 0.842 ± 0.011 -0.070 ± 0.072 0.101 ± 0.018 

es 

Model A 77.5 (96.5) 129.8 (53.8) 0.851 0.041 0.130 Model B 77.5 (96.3) 272.9 (86.2) 0.828 -0.107 0.093 Model C 77.5 (96.5) 127.5 (52.8) 0.849 0.030 0.126 Model D 77.5 (96.5) 200.8 (80.7) 0.838 -0.043 0.107 

Avg models 77.5 ± 0.0 182.7 ± 69.1 0.841 ± 0.011 -0.020 ± 0.069 0.114 ± 0.017 

fr 

Model A 63.9 (77.2) 117.8 (47.1) 0.849 0.047 0.114 Model B 63.9 (77.0) 242.0 (76.5) 0.827 -0.094 0.081 Model C 63.9 (77.2) 119.5 (46.7) 0.848 0.037 0.108 Model D 63.9 (77.2) 192.6 (75.8) 0.835 -0.042 0.092 

Avg models 63.9 ± 0.0 168.0 ± 60.4 0.840 ± 0.011 -0.013 ± 0.067 0.099 ± 0.015 

it 

Model A 64.1 (79.1) 109.6 (47.7) 0.846 0.064 0.094 Model B 64.0 (78.8) 230.6 (72.8) 0.823 -0.072 0.067 Model C 64.1 (79.1) 98.7 (34.1) 0.846 0.067 0.093 Model D 64.0 (79.1) 185.6 (73.3) 0.833 -0.011 0.078 

Avg models 64.0 ± 0.0 156.1 ± 62.9 0.837 ± 0.011 0.012 ± 0.067 0.083 ± 0.013 Avg langs 

Model A 63.1 ± 10.5 114.9 ± 13.5 0.849 ± 0.003 0.040 ± 0.026 0.110 ± 0.016 

Model B 63.1 ± 10.5 243.3 ± 26.2 0.826 ± 0.004 -0.108 ± 0.030 0.076 ± 0.013 

Model C 63.1 ± 10.5 112.9 ± 13.6 0.848 ± 0.002 0.032 ± 0.031 0.105 ± 0.017 

Model D 63.1 ± 10.5 184.9 ± 13.3 0.835 ± 0.003 -0.049 ± 0.034 0.088 ± 0.014 

behavior de 

Model A 47.9 (56.3) 90.7 (54.9) 0.847 0.050 0.091 Model B 47.7 (55.8) 148.6 (74.4) 0.828 -0.067 0.068 Model C 47.9 (56.3) 96.9 (37.9) 0.846 0.041 0.084 Model D 47.9 (56.3) 135.4 (97.0) 0.837 -0.013 0.078 

Avg models 47.8 ± 0.1 117.9 ± 28.5 0.839 ± 0.009 0.003 ± 0.054 0.080 ± 0.010 

en 

Model A 62.4 (78.7) 155.9 (83.1) 0.847 -0.038 0.109 Model B 62.3 (78.7) 241.8 (109.1) 0.831 -0.149 0.084 Model C 62.4 (78.7) 132.7 (63.3) 0.849 -0.027 0.112 Model D 62.4 (78.7) 212.7 (125.1) 0.836 -0.111 0.089 

Avg models 62.4 ± 0.1 185.8 ± 50.2 0.841 ± 0.009 -0.081 ± 0.059 0.098 ± 0.014 

es 

Model A 77.5 (96.5) 167.2 (80.5) 0.845 0.002 0.117 Model B 77.4 (96.5) 230.2 (94.4) 0.829 -0.097 0.098 Model C 77.5 (96.5) 138.9 (63.4) 0.848 0.021 0.124 Model D 77.5 (96.5) 260.2 (135.5) 0.834 -0.065 0.099 

Avg models 77.5 ± 0.0 199.1 ± 55.8 0.839 ± 0.009 -0.035 ± 0.055 0.109 ± 0.013 

Table 11: Full results (part 1). Rows grouped by setup and language. Avg Human Words varies slightly across models and setups due to rare cases where human comments were excluded from evaluation owing to missing generated counterparts (generation errors or hallucinations). Setup Lang Model Avg Human Words Avg Agent Words BERT ↑ rBERT ↑ ROUGE ↑

behavior fr 

Model A 63.9 (77.2) 133.6 (67.5) 0.846 0.024 0.107 Model B 63.7 (77.2) 199.8 (78.2) 0.829 -0.081 0.086 Model C 63.9 (77.2) 124.6 (54.2) 0.847 0.032 0.106 Model D 63.9 (77.2) 194.5 (115.4) 0.836 -0.037 0.092 

Avg models 63.8 ± 0.1 163.1 ± 39.6 0.839 ± 0.008 -0.016 ± 0.054 0.098 ± 0.011 

it 

Model A 64.1 (79.1) 130.8 (70.9) 0.842 0.042 0.090 Model B 63.9 (78.6) 183.4 (76.2) 0.826 -0.056 0.072 Model C 64.1 (79.1) 104.2 (41.7) 0.845 0.062 0.092 Model D 64.1 (79.1) 211.9 (126.5) 0.831 -0.022 0.076 

Avg models 64.0 ± 0.1 157.6 ± 49.0 0.836 ± 0.009 0.006 ± 0.055 0.082 ± 0.010 Avg langs 

Model A 63.1 ± 10.5 135.6 ± 29.4 0.845 ± 0.002 0.016 ± 0.035 0.103 ± 0.012 

Model B 63.0 ± 10.5 200.8 ± 37.3 0.829 ± 0.002 -0.090 ± 0.036 0.082 ± 0.012 

Model C 63.1 ± 10.5 119.4 ± 18.2 0.847 ± 0.001 0.026 ± 0.033 0.104 ± 0.016 

Model D 63.1 ± 10.5 203.0 ± 45.0 0.835 ± 0.002 -0.050 ± 0.040 0.087 ± 0.010 

behavior+r de 

Model A 47.9 (56.3) 84.7 (50.8) 0.853 0.085 0.112 Model B 47.6 (56.2) 156.8 (76.8) 0.829 -0.058 0.072 Model C 47.9 (56.3) 95.8 (36.8) 0.847 0.050 0.089 Model D 47.9 (56.3) 140.0 (86.5) 0.839 -0.001 0.085 

Avg models 47.8 ± 0.1 119.3 ± 34.6 0.842 ± 0.010 0.019 ± 0.062 0.089 ± 0.017 

en 

Model A 62.4 (78.7) 127.0 (77.1) 0.854 0.013 0.131 Model B 62.4 (78.0) 243.8 (114.3) 0.833 -0.134 0.086 Model C 62.4 (78.7) 123.8 (55.8) 0.850 -0.015 0.116 Model D 62.4 (78.7) 190.2 (103.2) 0.840 -0.085 0.098 

Avg models 62.4 ± 0.0 171.2 ± 57.3 0.844 ± 0.010 -0.055 ± 0.067 0.108 ± 0.020 

es 

Model A 77.5 (96.5) 149.0 (74.5) 0.852 0.046 0.138 Model B 77.2 (96.6) 246.7 (95.2) 0.831 -0.087 0.099 Model C 77.5 (96.5) 131.6 (59.1) 0.850 0.035 0.130 Model D 77.5 (96.5) 241.6 (117.5) 0.838 -0.040 0.109 

Avg models 77.4 ± 0.1 192.2 ± 60.4 0.843 ± 0.010 -0.011 ± 0.063 0.119 ± 0.018 

fr 

Model A 63.9 (77.2) 124.7 (62.5) 0.850 0.051 0.120 Model B 63.6 (76.9) 216.2 (83.3) 0.830 -0.076 0.086 Model C 63.9 (77.2) 121.4 (51.9) 0.848 0.039 0.109 Model D 63.9 (77.2) 195.6 (100.4) 0.837 -0.027 0.097 

Avg models 63.8 ± 0.1 164.5 ± 48.6 0.841 ± 0.009 -0.003 ± 0.060 0.103 ± 0.015 

it 

Model A 64.1 (79.1) 117.5 (67.9) 0.848 0.079 0.110 Model B 63.9 (78.9) 194.4 (83.0) 0.827 -0.047 0.073 Model C 64.1 (79.1) 101.5 (40.6) 0.847 0.070 0.096 Model D 64.0 (79.1) 204.5 (113.4) 0.834 -0.004 0.083 

Avg models 64.0 ± 0.1 154.5 ± 52.5 0.839 ± 0.010 0.024 ± 0.060 0.091 ± 0.016 Avg langs 

Model A 63.1 ± 10.5 120.6 ± 23.2 0.851 ± 0.003 0.055 ± 0.029 0.122 ± 0.012 

Model B 62.9 ± 10.5 211.6 ± 37.4 0.830 ± 0.002 -0.081 ± 0.034 0.083 ± 0.011 

Model C 63.1 ± 10.5 114.8 ± 15.4 0.848 ± 0.002 0.036 ± 0.031 0.108 ± 0.016 

Model D 63.1 ± 10.5 194.4 ± 36.4 0.838 ± 0.002 -0.031 ± 0.034 0.094 ± 0.011 

history de 

Model A 47.9 (56.3) 67.7 (38.3) 0.856 0.105 0.114 Model B 47.0 (55.2) 154.8 (65.0) 0.829 -0.064 0.070 Model C 47.9 (56.3) 85.3 (31.7) 0.848 0.059 0.091 Model D 47.9 (56.3) 130.7 (49.6) 0.837 -0.013 0.079 

Avg models 47.6 ± 0.4 109.6 ± 40.1 0.842 ± 0.012 0.022 ± 0.075 0.089 ± 0.019 

en 

Model A 62.4 (78.7) 96.7 (58.2) 0.860 0.054 0.145 Model B 62.2 (78.1) 203.8 (96.6) 0.837 -0.108 0.095 Model C 62.4 (78.7) 103.4 (47.6) 0.854 0.012 0.127 Model D 62.4 (78.7) 147.3 (62.9) 0.843 -0.063 0.105 

Avg models 62.4 ± 0.1 137.8 ± 49.4 0.849 ± 0.011 -0.026 ± 0.073 0.118 ± 0.023 

es 

Model A 77.5 (96.5) 103.1 (55.9) 0.859 0.091 0.154 Model B 77.3 (96.7) 210.8 (87.7) 0.836 -0.058 0.109 Model C 77.5 (96.5) 119.3 (51.9) 0.853 0.052 0.139 Model D 77.5 (96.5) 168.0 (65.7) 0.843 -0.008 0.119 

Avg models 77.4 ± 0.1 150.3 ± 48.9 0.848 ± 0.010 0.019 ± 0.065 0.130 ± 0.020 

fr 

Model A 63.9 (77.2) 90.0 (49.6) 0.858 0.104 0.142 Model B 63.4 (76.5) 191.7 (81.2) 0.834 -0.050 0.095 Model C 63.9 (77.2) 105.5 (45.8) 0.852 0.062 0.121 Model D 63.9 (77.2) 159.3 (62.6) 0.841 -0.004 0.107 

Avg models 63.8 ± 0.2 136.6 ± 47.2 0.846 ± 0.011 0.028 ± 0.068 0.116 ± 0.020 

it 

Model A 64.1 (79.1) 81.9 (48.5) 0.852 0.103 0.108 Model B 63.0 (78.4) 173.7 (71.7) 0.829 -0.034 0.075 Model C 64.1 (79.1) 91.5 (36.3) 0.848 0.077 0.098 Model D 64.1 (79.1) 155.2 (59.8) 0.837 0.014 0.085 

Avg models 63.8 ± 0.5 125.6 ± 45.7 0.842 ± 0.010 0.040 ± 0.062 0.091 ± 0.015 Avg langs 

Model A 63.1 ± 10.5 87.9 ± 13.8 0.857 ± 0.003 0.091 ± 0.022 0.133 ± 0.020 

Model B 62.6 ± 10.7 187.0 ± 22.8 0.833 ± 0.004 -0.063 ± 0.027 0.089 ± 0.016 

Model C 63.1 ± 10.5 101.0 ± 13.2 0.851 ± 0.003 0.053 ± 0.024 0.115 ± 0.020 

Model D 63.1 ± 10.5 152.1 ± 14.1 0.840 ± 0.003 -0.015 ± 0.029 0.099 ± 0.017 

Table 12: Full results (part 2). Rows grouped by setup and language. Avg Human Words varies slightly across models and setups due to rare cases where human comments were excluded from evaluation owing to missing generated counterparts (generation errors or hallucinations). Sentiment Dialog Acts WD ↓ JS ↓ Density Ratio CRIT NEG POS PART INF REP COM REQ ASK REF 

base de 

Model A 0.236 0.147 0.700 0.002 0.051 -0.027 -0.009 0.042 0.040 0.005 -0.107 0.003 0.000 Model B 0.565 0.270 0.549 0.018 0.077 0.034 0.007 0.078 0.057 -0.017 -0.165 0.036 -0.123 Model C 0.329 0.259 0.733 0.028 0.073 -0.061 -0.021 0.069 0.081 -0.027 -0.151 -0.019 0.029 Model D 0.459 0.207 0.733 -0.010 0.035 -0.000 -0.000 -0.020 0.066 -0.028 -0.100 0.069 -0.013 

Avg 0.397 ± 0.145 0.221 ± 0.056 0.679 ± 0.088 0.009 0.059 -0.014 -0.006 0.042 0.061 -0.017 -0.131 0.022 -0.027 

en 

Model A 0.188 0.114 0.750 -0.001 0.042 -0.011 -0.020 0.022 0.048 -0.004 -0.056 0.001 -0.021 Model B 0.486 0.247 0.591 0.010 0.066 0.038 -0.001 0.058 0.067 -0.053 -0.138 0.044 -0.091 Model C 0.171 0.193 0.764 0.012 0.056 -0.030 -0.046 0.040 0.066 0.003 -0.128 0.009 0.017 Model D 0.415 0.198 0.715 -0.010 0.035 0.007 -0.007 -0.011 0.065 -0.034 -0.074 0.069 -0.040 

Avg 0.315 ± 0.159 0.188 ± 0.055 0.705 ± 0.079 0.003 0.050 0.001 -0.019 0.027 0.062 -0.022 -0.099 0.031 -0.034 

es 

Model A 0.339 0.178 0.700 0.007 0.078 -0.030 -0.020 0.048 0.063 0.004 -0.082 -0.031 -0.037 Model B 0.580 0.272 0.579 0.012 0.104 0.032 0.003 0.070 0.068 -0.005 -0.142 0.001 -0.141 Model C 0.371 0.298 0.771 0.023 0.095 -0.033 -0.072 0.087 0.082 0.022 -0.080 -0.158 0.035 Model D 0.517 0.176 0.724 -0.000 0.047 0.020 -0.010 -0.015 0.060 0.009 -0.076 0.038 -0.072 

Avg 0.452 ± 0.115 0.231 ± 0.063 0.694 ± 0.082 0.010 0.081 -0.003 -0.025 0.048 0.068 0.007 -0.095 -0.038 -0.054 

fr 

Model A 0.239 0.156 0.699 0.006 0.049 -0.028 -0.007 0.048 0.064 -0.017 -0.087 -0.015 -0.012 Model B 0.501 0.277 0.570 0.014 0.078 0.030 0.012 0.084 0.076 -0.037 -0.162 0.025 -0.120 Model C 0.252 0.263 0.743 0.034 0.076 -0.074 -0.048 0.081 0.084 -0.022 -0.108 -0.052 0.029 Model D 0.404 0.217 0.694 0.001 0.040 0.006 -0.005 0.001 0.074 -0.028 -0.101 0.059 -0.047 

Avg 0.349 ± 0.126 0.228 ± 0.054 0.676 ± 0.074 0.014 0.061 -0.016 -0.012 0.053 0.074 -0.026 -0.115 0.004 -0.037 

it 

Model A 0.219 0.155 0.710 -0.006 0.054 -0.055 0.002 0.043 0.053 -0.000 -0.093 0.017 -0.014 Model B 0.559 0.296 0.566 0.005 0.089 0.015 0.009 0.090 0.063 -0.015 -0.153 0.051 -0.154 Model C 0.205 0.258 0.768 0.018 0.083 -0.110 -0.048 0.074 0.067 0.009 -0.144 0.019 0.032 Model D 0.462 0.198 0.693 -0.010 0.039 0.001 0.006 -0.005 0.051 0.003 -0.088 0.064 -0.060 

Avg 0.361 ± 0.177 0.227 ± 0.063 0.684 ± 0.085 0.002 0.066 -0.037 -0.008 0.050 0.058 -0.001 -0.120 0.038 -0.049 Avg 

Model A 0.244 ± 0.057 0.150 ± 0.023 0.712 ± 0.022 0.001 0.055 -0.030 -0.011 0.041 0.053 -0.003 -0.085 -0.005 -0.017 

Model B 0.538 ± 0.042 0.272 ± 0.018 0.571 ± 0.015 0.012 0.083 0.030 0.006 0.076 0.066 -0.025 -0.152 0.031 -0.126 

Model C 0.266 ± 0.084 0.254 ± 0.038 0.756 ± 0.017 0.023 0.077 -0.062 -0.047 0.070 0.076 -0.003 -0.122 -0.040 0.029 

Model D 0.451 ± 0.045 0.199 ± 0.015 0.712 ± 0.018 -0.006 0.039 0.007 -0.003 -0.010 0.063 -0.016 -0.088 0.060 -0.046 

profile de 

Model A 0.215 0.134 0.701 0.002 0.046 -0.020 -0.012 0.019 0.035 -0.009 -0.094 0.019 0.015 Model B 0.566 0.290 0.537 0.016 0.078 0.040 0.008 0.075 0.061 -0.033 -0.158 0.053 -0.141 Model C 0.384 0.263 0.721 0.029 0.073 -0.064 -0.021 0.056 0.081 -0.045 -0.145 0.000 0.035 Model D 0.452 0.215 0.688 0.005 0.045 -0.002 -0.012 -0.018 0.061 -0.058 -0.075 0.071 -0.017 

Avg 0.404 ± 0.147 0.225 ± 0.069 0.662 ± 0.084 0.013 0.061 -0.012 -0.009 0.033 0.059 -0.036 -0.118 0.036 -0.027 

en 

Model A 0.165 0.113 0.736 -0.004 0.041 -0.019 -0.019 0.014 0.049 -0.014 -0.052 0.015 -0.011 Model B 0.487 0.271 0.564 0.011 0.068 0.041 0.003 0.056 0.073 -0.062 -0.132 0.057 -0.114 Model C 0.223 0.212 0.741 0.017 0.060 -0.051 -0.045 0.029 0.079 -0.010 -0.125 0.018 0.026 Model D 0.294 0.212 0.655 0.008 0.045 -0.021 -0.011 -0.009 0.068 -0.062 -0.054 0.069 -0.033 

Avg 0.292 ± 0.140 0.202 ± 0.065 0.674 ± 0.083 0.008 0.053 -0.012 -0.018 0.022 0.067 -0.037 -0.091 0.040 -0.033 

es 

Model A 0.307 0.166 0.700 0.002 0.072 -0.030 -0.019 0.033 0.066 -0.002 -0.081 -0.010 -0.030 Model B 0.585 0.283 0.568 0.012 0.104 0.032 0.008 0.064 0.071 -0.014 -0.143 0.019 -0.155 Model C 0.372 0.299 0.759 0.027 0.097 -0.036 -0.074 0.071 0.086 0.017 -0.083 -0.143 0.038 Model D 0.467 0.186 0.684 0.009 0.062 0.002 -0.011 -0.016 0.059 -0.003 -0.062 0.040 -0.080 

Avg 0.433 ± 0.121 0.233 ± 0.067 0.678 ± 0.080 0.013 0.084 -0.008 -0.024 0.038 0.071 -0.000 -0.092 -0.023 -0.057 

fr 

Model A 0.202 0.155 0.696 -0.001 0.047 -0.029 -0.011 0.030 0.065 -0.028 -0.082 0.008 0.001 Model B 0.505 0.289 0.554 0.013 0.078 0.032 0.015 0.079 0.077 -0.045 -0.155 0.040 -0.134 Model C 0.247 0.264 0.739 0.035 0.077 -0.079 -0.047 0.068 0.085 -0.029 -0.104 -0.039 0.033 Model D 0.323 0.228 0.652 0.010 0.051 -0.002 -0.012 0.003 0.073 -0.057 -0.081 0.060 -0.044 

Avg 0.319 ± 0.134 0.234 ± 0.058 0.660 ± 0.079 0.014 0.063 -0.020 -0.014 0.045 0.075 -0.040 -0.105 0.017 -0.036 

it 

Model A 0.224 0.166 0.698 -0.007 0.054 -0.057 0.000 0.031 0.055 -0.009 -0.093 0.035 -0.010 Model B 0.560 0.308 0.556 0.001 0.089 0.022 0.016 0.086 0.064 -0.019 -0.148 0.057 -0.167 Model C 0.209 0.270 0.758 0.021 0.086 -0.114 -0.052 0.065 0.069 0.004 -0.144 0.029 0.037 Model D 0.406 0.191 0.659 -0.001 0.046 -0.007 0.003 -0.006 0.043 -0.010 -0.066 0.064 -0.066 

Avg 0.350 ± 0.166 0.234 ± 0.066 0.668 ± 0.085 0.003 0.069 -0.039 -0.008 0.044 0.058 -0.009 -0.113 0.046 -0.052 Avg 

Model A 0.223 ± 0.052 0.147 ± 0.023 0.706 ± 0.017 -0.002 0.052 -0.031 -0.012 0.025 0.054 -0.012 -0.080 0.013 -0.007 

Model B 0.541 ± 0.042 0.288 ± 0.013 0.556 ± 0.012 0.010 0.084 0.033 0.010 0.072 0.069 -0.035 -0.147 0.045 -0.142 

Model C 0.287 ± 0.084 0.262 ± 0.031 0.744 ± 0.016 0.026 0.079 -0.069 -0.048 0.058 0.080 -0.013 -0.120 -0.027 0.034 

Model D 0.389 ± 0.077 0.206 ± 0.017 0.668 ± 0.017 0.006 0.050 -0.006 -0.009 -0.009 0.061 -0.038 -0.068 0.061 -0.048 

behavior de 

Model A 0.257 0.227 0.644 0.004 0.055 -0.012 -0.002 0.133 0.060 0.011 -0.142 -0.094 -0.013 Model B 0.551 0.246 0.493 0.010 0.073 0.035 0.023 0.141 -0.072 -0.003 -0.129 0.012 -0.090 Model C 0.360 0.281 0.687 0.030 0.074 -0.059 -0.021 0.112 0.084 -0.015 -0.177 -0.045 0.017 Model D 0.389 0.233 0.536 -0.002 0.059 0.009 0.007 0.114 0.038 -0.091 -0.125 0.046 -0.056 

Avg 0.389 ± 0.122 0.247 ± 0.024 0.590 ± 0.091 0.011 0.065 -0.007 0.002 0.125 0.027 -0.024 -0.143 -0.020 -0.036 

en 

Model A 0.278 0.181 0.632 -0.007 0.045 0.012 -0.006 0.087 0.070 0.004 -0.091 -0.049 -0.064 Model B 0.510 0.229 0.510 0.006 0.063 0.052 0.020 0.096 -0.025 -0.030 -0.098 0.038 -0.123 Model C 0.259 0.233 0.675 0.016 0.058 -0.023 -0.037 0.081 0.087 0.010 -0.166 0.000 -0.027 Model D 0.399 0.249 0.518 -0.004 0.052 0.024 0.008 0.089 0.054 -0.084 -0.091 0.063 -0.112 

Avg 0.361 ± 0.117 0.223 ± 0.029 0.584 ± 0.083 0.003 0.055 0.016 -0.004 0.088 0.047 -0.025 -0.111 0.013 -0.081 

es 

Model A 0.457 0.235 0.598 0.008 0.079 0.010 -0.015 0.100 0.073 0.007 -0.113 -0.060 -0.090 Model B 0.584 0.241 0.536 -0.000 0.096 0.040 0.028 0.094 -0.012 -0.009 -0.102 0.012 -0.146 Model C 0.413 0.299 0.713 0.028 0.097 -0.020 -0.065 0.097 0.086 0.021 -0.112 -0.137 0.005 Model D 0.536 0.234 0.529 -0.000 0.080 0.036 0.009 0.088 0.052 -0.032 -0.119 0.021 -0.134 

Avg 0.498 ± 0.077 0.253 ± 0.031 0.594 ± 0.085 0.009 0.088 0.017 -0.011 0.095 0.050 -0.003 -0.112 -0.041 -0.091 

Table 13: Dialog acts (part 1). JS = Jensen-Shannon distance on label proportions. Density Ratio = human labels/sentence ÷ agent labels/sentence. Dialog Acts = human proportion − agent proportion for each label (positive 

⇒ agent under-produces). Sentiment Dialog Acts WD ↓ JS ↓ Density Ratio CRIT NEG POS PART INF REP COM REQ ASK REF 

behavior fr 

Model A 0.358 0.222 0.615 0.007 0.055 -0.004 -0.001 0.115 0.075 -0.007 -0.120 -0.069 -0.051 Model B 0.508 0.246 0.511 0.007 0.073 0.035 0.030 0.125 -0.011 -0.040 -0.124 0.025 -0.120 Model C 0.323 0.280 0.689 0.038 0.076 -0.057 -0.050 0.106 0.088 -0.012 -0.127 -0.070 0.009 Model D 0.457 0.291 0.524 0.004 0.064 0.034 0.008 0.114 0.068 -0.108 -0.133 0.054 -0.106 

Avg 0.411 ± 0.086 0.260 ± 0.031 0.585 ± 0.084 0.014 0.067 0.002 -0.003 0.115 0.055 -0.042 -0.126 -0.015 -0.067 

it 

Model A 0.358 0.204 0.609 -0.006 0.061 -0.019 0.006 0.112 0.060 -0.007 -0.123 -0.019 -0.064 Model B 0.556 0.266 0.512 -0.009 0.084 0.039 0.037 0.127 -0.028 -0.028 -0.113 0.036 -0.146 Model C 0.285 0.277 0.717 0.021 0.086 -0.095 -0.053 0.102 0.072 0.012 -0.169 0.013 0.012 Model D 0.484 0.259 0.501 -0.010 0.069 0.026 0.021 0.105 0.030 -0.065 -0.109 0.059 -0.125 

Avg 0.421 ± 0.122 0.252 ± 0.032 0.585 ± 0.100 -0.001 0.075 -0.012 0.003 0.112 0.034 -0.022 -0.129 0.022 -0.081 Avg 

Model A 0.342 ± 0.079 0.214 ± 0.022 0.620 ± 0.018 0.001 0.059 -0.003 -0.003 0.109 0.068 0.002 -0.118 -0.058 -0.056 

Model B 0.542 ± 0.033 0.245 ± 0.014 0.512 ± 0.016 0.003 0.078 0.040 0.028 0.117 -0.030 -0.022 -0.113 0.025 -0.125 

Model C 0.328 ± 0.061 0.274 ± 0.025 0.696 ± 0.018 0.027 0.078 -0.051 -0.045 0.099 0.083 0.003 -0.150 -0.048 0.003 

Model D 0.453 ± 0.061 0.253 ± 0.024 0.522 ± 0.013 -0.002 0.065 0.026 0.011 0.102 0.048 -0.076 -0.115 0.049 -0.107 

behavior+r de 

Model A 0.155 0.160 0.701 -0.002 0.042 -0.021 -0.002 0.084 0.032 0.004 -0.096 -0.069 0.027 Model B 0.534 0.225 0.524 0.004 0.070 0.025 0.021 0.122 -0.002 -0.030 -0.134 0.010 -0.086 Model C 0.343 0.266 0.686 0.025 0.067 -0.066 -0.021 0.110 0.079 -0.020 -0.164 -0.050 0.038 Model D 0.289 0.150 0.583 0.004 0.044 -0.014 0.005 0.084 -0.014 -0.038 -0.097 0.030 -0.004 

Avg 0.330 ± 0.157 0.200 ± 0.055 0.623 ± 0.085 0.008 0.056 -0.019 0.001 0.100 0.024 -0.021 -0.123 -0.020 -0.006 

en 

Model A 0.168 0.111 0.705 -0.005 0.032 -0.004 -0.004 0.059 0.041 -0.003 -0.056 -0.040 -0.019 Model B 0.477 0.228 0.532 0.004 0.056 0.038 0.017 0.094 0.037 -0.060 -0.109 0.038 -0.114 Model C 0.191 0.208 0.686 0.015 0.049 -0.042 -0.030 0.086 0.083 0.006 -0.142 -0.017 -0.007 Model D 0.265 0.151 0.565 0.002 0.036 -0.008 0.003 0.070 0.008 -0.048 -0.061 0.046 -0.048 

Avg 0.275 ± 0.141 0.175 ± 0.053 0.622 ± 0.086 0.004 0.043 -0.004 -0.004 0.077 0.042 -0.026 -0.092 0.007 -0.047 

es 

Model A 0.338 0.157 0.673 0.004 0.059 -0.015 -0.004 0.063 0.054 -0.000 -0.086 -0.041 -0.034 Model B 0.585 0.238 0.562 0.002 0.083 0.032 0.023 0.088 0.047 -0.032 -0.121 0.017 -0.138 Model C 0.349 0.275 0.721 0.022 0.081 -0.037 -0.050 0.100 0.084 0.019 -0.110 -0.131 0.022 Model D 0.449 0.161 0.564 0.003 0.058 0.014 0.007 0.069 0.018 -0.017 -0.085 0.021 -0.088 

Avg 0.430 ± 0.114 0.208 ± 0.058 0.630 ± 0.080 0.008 0.070 -0.001 -0.006 0.080 0.050 -0.008 -0.100 -0.034 -0.059 

fr 

Model A 0.240 0.161 0.671 0.001 0.043 -0.021 -0.000 0.076 0.055 -0.012 -0.090 -0.058 0.006 Model B 0.499 0.249 0.535 0.007 0.067 0.029 0.029 0.110 0.047 -0.057 -0.139 0.021 -0.113 Model C 0.242 0.268 0.699 0.033 0.069 -0.062 -0.043 0.107 0.085 -0.016 -0.119 -0.084 0.031 Model D 0.353 0.188 0.556 0.008 0.048 0.004 0.005 0.086 0.024 -0.056 -0.112 0.040 -0.046 

Avg 0.333 ± 0.122 0.216 ± 0.050 0.615 ± 0.082 0.012 0.057 -0.013 -0.002 0.095 0.053 -0.035 -0.115 -0.020 -0.031 

it 

Model A 0.229 0.142 0.685 -0.008 0.046 -0.034 0.006 0.067 0.046 -0.006 -0.097 -0.016 -0.004 Model B 0.542 0.267 0.542 -0.013 0.078 0.037 0.029 0.116 0.037 -0.051 -0.130 0.039 -0.142 Model C 0.194 0.255 0.722 0.017 0.074 -0.097 -0.040 0.106 0.069 0.007 -0.159 -0.012 0.034 Model D 0.391 0.180 0.528 -0.007 0.054 0.005 0.014 0.086 -0.006 -0.035 -0.084 0.046 -0.073 

Avg 0.339 ± 0.160 0.211 ± 0.060 0.619 ± 0.099 -0.003 0.063 -0.022 0.002 0.094 0.037 -0.021 -0.118 0.014 -0.046 Avg 

Model A 0.226 ± 0.073 0.146 ± 0.021 0.687 ± 0.016 -0.002 0.044 -0.019 -0.001 0.070 0.046 -0.003 -0.085 -0.045 -0.005 

Model B 0.527 ± 0.042 0.241 ± 0.017 0.539 ± 0.014 0.001 0.071 0.032 0.024 0.106 0.033 -0.046 -0.127 0.025 -0.119 

Model C 0.264 ± 0.078 0.254 ± 0.027 0.703 ± 0.018 0.023 0.068 -0.061 -0.037 0.102 0.080 -0.001 -0.139 -0.059 0.024 

Model D 0.349 ± 0.075 0.166 ± 0.017 0.559 ± 0.020 0.002 0.048 0.000 0.007 0.079 0.006 -0.039 -0.088 0.037 -0.052 

history de 

Model A 0.136 0.124 0.820 0.011 0.030 -0.024 -0.012 0.005 -0.003 -0.004 -0.074 0.028 0.044 Model B 0.558 0.261 0.592 0.019 0.075 0.031 0.004 0.076 0.057 -0.036 -0.151 0.037 -0.112 Model C 0.316 0.260 0.791 0.026 0.062 -0.027 -0.042 0.027 0.078 -0.036 -0.150 -0.001 0.063 Model D 0.416 0.204 0.736 -0.007 0.022 0.003 -0.009 -0.030 0.067 -0.040 -0.081 0.070 0.005 

Avg 0.356 ± 0.177 0.212 ± 0.065 0.735 ± 0.101 0.012 0.047 -0.004 -0.015 0.019 0.050 -0.029 -0.114 0.034 0.000 

en 

Model A 0.140 0.085 0.816 -0.002 0.022 -0.011 -0.013 -0.001 0.027 -0.011 -0.049 0.023 0.016 Model B 0.467 0.244 0.615 0.021 0.064 0.019 -0.002 0.062 0.061 -0.076 -0.122 0.051 -0.078 Model C 0.097 0.200 0.819 0.008 0.044 -0.004 -0.062 0.008 0.058 0.002 -0.123 0.011 0.057 Model D 0.375 0.190 0.705 -0.006 0.025 -0.004 -0.013 -0.014 0.065 -0.045 -0.061 0.069 -0.016 

Avg 0.270 ± 0.180 0.180 ± 0.068 0.739 ± 0.098 0.005 0.039 0.000 -0.022 0.014 0.053 -0.033 -0.089 0.038 -0.005 

es 

Model A 0.237 0.127 0.814 0.010 0.048 -0.051 -0.015 0.007 0.046 -0.005 -0.072 0.016 0.017 Model B 0.571 0.254 0.623 0.020 0.098 0.025 -0.000 0.072 0.060 -0.019 -0.135 0.012 -0.131 Model C 0.323 0.276 0.801 0.017 0.077 0.005 -0.091 0.047 0.079 0.018 -0.086 -0.123 0.057 Model D 0.492 0.159 0.735 0.002 0.030 0.016 -0.019 -0.028 0.058 0.004 -0.057 0.041 -0.046 

Avg 0.406 ± 0.153 0.204 ± 0.072 0.743 ± 0.087 0.012 0.063 -0.001 -0.031 0.025 0.061 -0.001 -0.087 -0.014 -0.026 

fr 

Model A 0.164 0.125 0.795 0.004 0.030 -0.039 -0.008 0.016 0.041 -0.022 -0.072 0.019 0.032 Model B 0.492 0.262 0.604 0.021 0.076 0.017 0.013 0.085 0.065 -0.053 -0.150 0.030 -0.104 Model C 0.201 0.263 0.782 0.028 0.065 -0.044 -0.068 0.049 0.080 -0.034 -0.101 -0.043 0.069 Model D 0.379 0.195 0.711 0.002 0.022 0.007 -0.011 -0.017 0.066 -0.038 -0.081 0.059 -0.010 

Avg 0.309 ± 0.154 0.211 ± 0.066 0.723 ± 0.088 0.014 0.048 -0.015 -0.019 0.033 0.063 -0.037 -0.101 0.016 -0.003 

it 

Model A 0.152 0.137 0.814 -0.001 0.028 -0.057 -0.002 0.006 0.042 -0.003 -0.080 0.035 0.030 Model B 0.550 0.283 0.599 0.013 0.087 0.007 0.004 0.092 0.059 -0.031 -0.143 0.050 -0.138 Model C 0.166 0.263 0.808 0.017 0.072 -0.062 -0.084 0.045 0.067 0.010 -0.150 0.027 0.058 Model D 0.448 0.182 0.700 -0.012 0.020 0.004 -0.001 -0.019 0.053 -0.004 -0.078 0.064 -0.027 

Avg 0.329 ± 0.201 0.217 ± 0.069 0.730 ± 0.102 0.004 0.052 -0.027 -0.021 0.031 0.055 -0.007 -0.113 0.044 -0.019 Avg 

Model A 0.166 ± 0.041 0.120 ± 0.020 0.812 ± 0.009 0.004 0.031 -0.037 -0.010 0.007 0.031 -0.009 -0.069 0.024 0.028 

Model B 0.527 ± 0.045 0.261 ± 0.014 0.607 ± 0.013 0.019 0.080 0.020 0.004 0.077 0.060 -0.043 -0.140 0.036 -0.112 

Model C 0.221 ± 0.098 0.253 ± 0.030 0.800 ± 0.015 0.019 0.064 -0.026 -0.069 0.035 0.072 -0.008 -0.122 -0.026 0.061 

Model D 0.422 ± 0.049 0.186 ± 0.017 0.717 ± 0.017 -0.004 0.024 0.005 -0.011 -0.022 0.062 -0.025 -0.072 0.061 -0.019 

Table 14: Dialog acts (overall). JS = Jensen-Shannon distance on label proportions. Density Ratio = human labels/sentence ÷ agent labels/sentence. Dialog Acts = human proportion − agent proportion for each label (positive 

⇒ agent under-produces). Figure 20: ROUGE-L between agent and human comments under profile conditioning, stratified by profile 

word count. Each row is a language; each column is a model. Brown solid line: ROUGE-L (left axis). Red dashed line: proportion of samples in each bucket (right axis). Figure 21: Rescaled BERTScore (rBERT) between agent and human comments under profile conditioning, stratified by profile word count. Conventions as in Figure 20. Figure 22: Dialog act JSD between agent and human distributions under profile conditioning, stratified by 

profile word count. Lower is better. Conventions as in Figure 20. Figure 23: Sentiment JSD between agent and human distributions under profile conditioning, stratified by 

profile word count. Lower is better. Conventions as in Figure 20.