Title: TouchThinker: Scaling Tactile Commonsense Reasoning to the Open World with Large-scale Data and Action-aware Representation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11637v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:30:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
## : Scaling Tactile Commonsense Reasoning to the Open World with Large-scale Data and Action-aware Representation 

Kailin Lyu 1,3 , Di Wu 1, Pengwei Zhang 1, Yuhang Zheng 2, Yingxin Lai 4,Long Xiao 1, Kangyi Wu 5, Pengna Li 5, Chen Gao 2, Lianyu Hu 6, Weihao Yuan 7,

Xiaobin Hu 2, B, Jie Hao 1, B, Ce Hao 3, B, Shuicheng Yan 2, B

1Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

2National University of Singapore, 3Zhongguancun Academy, 4Xiamen University 

5Xi’an Jiaotong University, 6Nanyang Technological University, 7Nanjing University 

BCorresponding authors 0       

> 20
> 40
> 80
> 60
> +7.6% +6.6%
> +7.5%
> +10 .0%
> SFD SOI OSC TSA
> Qwen2.5 -
> VL -7B GPT -4o VTV -
> LLM -7B Ours -7B

## TouchThinker -1M 

ü400+ daily objects 

ü8 collection scenes 

ü7 tactile sensor types 

ü1M visual -tactile image frames 

üDiverse Dynamic Tactile Interactions 8 types 

> of question -
> answering tasks

## …10 types 

> of tactile
> sensor

## 80+

> Object
> categories

TouchThinker -1M 

Data Construction 

Inference Example              

> The first object feels
> moderately
> deformable and slightly sticky, suggesting a
> cloth -like material suitable for wiping glass .

Conventional Methods  

> limited generalization model hallucination

Ours (TouchThinker )                         

> The second object feels highly deformable
> and moderately bumpy, with strong elasticity
> and high friction, suggesting asoft textile -
> like material that can gently wipe glass
> without scratching it .
> generalization Reliable reasoning
> <Question>
> Which object is more suitable for wiping glass?
> Stone
> Sponge

Figure 1: The core contributions of TouchThinker. (1) We propose an action-aware tactile encoder to enable efficient tactile representation learning. Upon it, we construct TouchThinker-1M, a million-scale, multi-source Visuotactile dataset that expands the scope of tactile reasoning. (2) We further introduce TouchThinker-Bench to support multi-dimensional evaluation of open-world tactile reasoning. (3) Across multiple tasks, TouchThinker achieves significant improvements over prior methods. 

Abstract 

Touch is a key modality for embodied agents to understand the physical world. Although re-cent work has incorporated tactile signals into language systems for tactile commonsense rea-soning, scaling such systems to realistic open-world settings remains challenging due to two key bottlenecks: (1) current tactile reasoning datasets remain limited in format and scale, pro-viding insufficient supervision for reasoning from tactile observations to physical common-sense and hindering the learning of transferable tactile commonsense; (2) Tactile signals are inherently redundant and action-specific, yet existing methods often overlook these proper-ties, resulting in inefficient representations with limited semantic expressiveness. To address these limitations, we propose TouchThinker, a tactile-language framework that scales tac-tile commonsense reasoning to the open world from both data and representation perspec-tives. First, we construct TouchThinker-1M, a million-scale, multi-source tactile reasoning dataset covering 415 objects, 8 scenarios, and 

7 sensor types, providing a solid data founda-tion for open-world generalization. We fur-ther introduce TouchThinker-Bench, an open-world benchmark with more realistic and di-verse tasks. Then, we propose action-aware modeling mechanism to improve tactile repre-sentation efficiency and enable efficient rea-soning. Experimental results demonstrate that TouchThinker achieves competitive per-formance against state-of-the-art models across multiple datasets. Our code and dataset will be made available at: https://github.com/ lvkailin0118/TouchThinker .

> arXiv:2606.11637v1 [cs.AI] 10 Jun 2026

1 Introduction 

Among human senses, touch is fundamental for per-ceiving and interacting with the physical world. It provides physical cues that vision alone cannot reli-ably capture, including material properties, surface texture, and contact state, thereby supporting physi-cal reasoning and action decisions (Li et al., 2024b). For example, when a person touches a hard grain of rice, they can infer that it is under-ripe; simi-larly, when touching a soft sponge, they can deduce that it is suitable for wiping based on the context. Therefore, incorporating tactile information into commonsense reasoning frameworks and develop-ing tactile reasoning in open-world scenarios are crucial for advancing embodied intelligence. Several recent studies have begun to integrate tactile perception with large language models (Yu et al., 2024, 2025; Xie et al., 2026; Cheng et al., 2026), enabling robots to perform tactile under-standing tasks under natural language instructions. Despite these advances, existing approaches still struggle to achieve reliable and robust tactile rea-soning in open-world environments, primarily due to limitations in data and representation. (1) On the data side , existing public tactile reasoning datasets remain limited in both format and scale (Yu et al., 2024, 2025; Xie et al., 2026), hindering models’ ability to perform tactile reasoning in open-world environments. Specifically, most rely on limited predefined attributes and question-answering tem-plates, lacking causal reasoning supervision from tactile observations to physical properties and fur-ther to physical commonsense, which can induce hallucinations (Ishmam et al., 2024). Moreover, these datasets typically cover only one to three sen-sor types, making it difficult for models to distin-guish sensor-specific representational biases from physical property variations shared across sensors, thereby limiting their ability to learn transferable tactile commonsense and cross-sensor physical rea-soning. (2) On the representation side , existing methods still struggle to effectively model tactile features. First, compared with visual signals, tac-tile interaction streams typically contain numerous static and transitional frames, whereas task-relevant attributes are localized within only a few highly in-formative segments (Abad and Ranasinghe, 2020), resulting in substantial redundancy. In addition, tac-tile signals are inherently action-specific: pressing primarily reveals hardness, sliding captures fric-tion, and rotation exposes texture. However, exist-ing methods typically rely on uniform sampling or full-frame encoding, modeling all frames indiscrim-inately. This makes it difficult to suppress noise from low-information frames and explicitly align action types with question semantics, resulting in inefficient representations with limited semantic expressiveness. To address these challenges, we introduce Touch-Thinker, an open-world tactile-language framework that advances both data and representation. On the data side, we construct TouchThinker-1M, which integrates multi-source visuotactile data and ap-plies systematic preprocessing, annotation unifi-cation, and question-answer expansion to provide semantically consistent supervision for tactile rea-soning. On the representation side, we design an action-aware modeling mechanism that first fuses tactile tokens under question guidance and then performs action-aware Gaussian MoE modeling to identify query-relevant action segments and re-duce representational redundancy. Based on it, we further develop a two-stage tactile-language training paradigm that aligns tactile evidence with language-based reasoning in the LLM. Experi-ments across multiple benchmarks, including the VTV-150K (Xie et al., 2026) and our newly con-structed TouchThinker-Bench, demonstrate that TouchThinker achieves higher reasoning accuracy than state-of-the-art methods and supports reliable open-world tactile inference. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • Framework : We propose TouchThinker , a tactile-language reasoning framework that aligns tactile cues with task semantics through an action-aware modeling mechanism, enabling efficient tactile representations. • Datasets : We construct TouchThinker-1M , a million-scale, multi-source dataset that expands tactile data across multiple dimensions to support open-world tactile reasoning. We further intro-duce TouchThinker-Bench , a systematic bench-mark covering diverse tactile sensors and task types for rigorous multi-dimensional evaluation of open-world tactile commonsense reasoning. • Practice : TouchThinker outperforms existing tactile-language models across multiple main-stream datasets and subtasks, while demonstrat-ing more reliable physical reasoning. These re-sults highlight its potential for robotic interaction in open-world environments and provide new in-sights for future research on tactile intelligence. 2 Related work 

Tactile Sensing and Perception. In recent years, tactile sensing has evolved from early capacitive ar-rays, piezoresistive sensors, and magnetic sensors to advanced vision based systems capable of captur-ing high resolution contact information (Meribout et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025). Visuotactile sensors have attracted growing attention because they can record fine grained spatiotemporal deformation on contact surfaces. Representative systems include DIGIT, GelSight, and Tac3D (Abad and Ranas-inghe, 2020). Building on these advances, many studies have used visuotactile sensing to infer mul-tidimensional tactile properties, thereby support-ing dexterous manipulation tasks such as material classification, grasping, and insertion (Lyu et al., 2026; Zheng et al., 2026). Recent research has shifted toward representation learning for tactile data. UniTouch (Yang et al., 2024) and T3 (Zhao et al., 2024) adopt visual self supervised objectives for fine grained feature extraction, while UniT (Xu et al., 2025) introduces VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021) for compact tactile latent space modeling. To ad-dress sensor heterogeneity, several studies employ joint training and alignment strategies to encourage consistent representations across sensors (Xie et al., 2026; Feng et al., 2025). In contrast, we identify representational redundancy in tactile signals and emphasize the action specific nature of tactile infor-mation. Based on this observation, we aim to learn more efficient tactile representations and unlock their potential for complex tactile reasoning. 

Tactile Commonsense Reasoning. Multimodal large language models jointly model language and visual information, substantially improving cross modal reasoning and reshaping research paradigms (Yin et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a; Wu et al., 2025). While early work primarily focused on vision language models (Du et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024a; Deng et al., 2025), recent studies have begun to leverage the reasoning and under-standing capabilities of large language models to model tactile signals, gradually establishing a touch language modeling paradigm for embodied inter-action. Representative studies such as Octopi (Yu et al., 2024), Octopi 1.5 (Yu et al., 2025), and VTV-LLM (Xie et al., 2026) have introduced important methods and benchmark datasets for tactile rea-soning. However, taken together, existing studies remain constrained by limited datasets (e.g., sensor, scale, and formats), and directly transferring vision-based methods overlooks the unique properties of tactile perception. Motivated by this gap, we curate and release TouchThinker-1M, the largest tactile commonsense reasoning dataset to date to the best of our knowledge. It substantially surpasses exist-ing benchmarks by scaling the data across multi-ple dimensions, thereby providing a stronger data foundation. Coupled with our methodological im-provements, TouchThinker enhances the practical applicability and generalization of tactile common-sense reasoning in open-world scenarios. 

3 Curating TouchThinker-1M Dataset 

Multi-Source Tactile Data Collection. To address the limitations of existing tactile reasoning datasets in format and scale, which constrain models’ rea-soning capabilities, we construct TouchThinker-1M , a large scale multisource visuotactile dataset for open-world tactile commonsense reasoning. It systematically integrates mainstream visuotactile data sources from nine datasets, including repre-sentative sources such as TacQuad (Feng et al., 2025), PHYSICLEAR (Yu et al., 2024), and VTV-150K (Xie et al., 2026), comprising approximately 

1M frames in total. The incorporation of heteroge-neous sources substantially broadens the distribu-tion of tactile signals and provides a foundation for learning generalizable tactile semantic representa-tions. As shown in Figure 2, TouchThinker-1M significantly improves the scale and diversity of tactile data along five complementary dimensions: sensor type, interaction action, object coverage, sample size, and task formulation. Dataset details are provided in the Appendix A.1.1. 

Tactile Attribute Annotation and Unification. 

Since annotation schemas vary across tactile datasets, directly merging them would lead to an inconsistent semantic space and hinder learning of stable tactile concepts. To address this, we therefore adapt the VTV-150K (Xie et al., 2026) schema into a unified four dimensional tactile at-tribute space covering Hardness, Protrusion, Elas-ticity, and Friction. For data with existing anno-tations, we map the original labels to this unified schema; for unannotated data, we manually assign attributes based on object appearance, tactile obser-vations, and deformation patterns. Each sample is independently labeled by multiple annotators, cross verified, and adjudicated when disagreements arise. Samples with insufficient tactile evidence are ex-cluded, yielding reliable supervision that remains consistent across datasets and sensors. (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure 2: Data statistics of TouchThinker-1M and TouchThinker-Bench. (a) Scale comparison between TouchThinker-1M and representative tactile reasoning datasets in terms of sensor type, object coverage, sample size, and task formulation. (b) Distribution of tactile sensor types in TouchThinker-1M. (c) Distribution of scene categories in TouchThinker-1M. (d) Semantic taxonomy and category distribution of TouchThinker-Bench. 

Standardized Processing of Tactile Videos. We standardize all samples into a unified video format to capture tactile interaction dynamics during con-tact. For existing tactile videos, we retain valid contact intervals and remove noncontact, noisy, or redundant segments. For static tactile images, we construct short video sequences by organizing frames according to object category and contact state to capture deformation evolution. All videos are further processed through contact region crop-ping, frame rate resampling, interpolation, tempo-ral truncation, and length normalization, yielding clips of approximately 6 to 8 seconds that allow TouchThinker-1M to encode diverse tactile dynam-ics in a consistent format. 

Question Answer Format Expansion. To re-duce shallow semantic learning from templated tactile question answering (Yu et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2026), TouchThinker-1M additionally in-troduces two complementary formats: chain-of-thought reasoning and open-ended question an-swering. Tactile chain-of-thought instances require an intermediate rationale and a final answer us-ing <think>...</think><answer>...</answer> , where  

> <think></think>

records tactile evidence and reason-ing paths, and <answer></answer> provides attribute judgments or commonsense conclusions. Open-ended tactile question answering covers free form description, comparative reasoning, attribute ex-planation, interaction prediction, and open-world decision making, enabling more realistic tactile lan-guage reasoning. Construction details are provided in the Appendix A.1.2. 

4 TouchThinker-Bench 

Existing tactile reasoning benchmarks are often constrained by limited object categories, templated question answering formats, and restricted sensor coverage (Yu et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2026), making it difficult to assess whether models acquire trans-ferable tactile semantics. To comprehensively eval-uate tactile commonsense reasoning in open-world scenarios, we introduce TouchThinker-Bench. It designed for more realistic open-world evaluation and incorporates unseen objects, unseen sensors, and diverse task, thereby enabling systematic as-sessment of tactile understanding, commonsense reasoning, and generalization across sensors. 

Dataset creation and selection. We first se-lect samples from TouchThinker-1M using an object-level 6:1 train-test split. To evaluate cross-sensor generalization, we further incorporate self-collected data and several additional datasets (Feng et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2024), covering three sen-sor types unseen during training. These sensors differ substantially in imaging mechanisms and exhibit intrinsically distinct data characteristics. Then, we apply data processing procedures similar to those described in Section 3 and conduct manual verification, yielding test samples across 200 ob-ject categories, with their distribution shown in Fig-ure 2(d). Further dataset collection processes and dataset details are provided in the Appendix A.2.1. 

Task Taxonomy. TouchThinker-Bench comprises three core task categories. (1) Basic tactile prop-erty understanding. This task requires models to identify fundamental tactile attributes, including hardness, roughness, elasticity, and friction. (2) Ba-sic tactile reasoning. Following prior benchmarks such as Octopi (Yu et al., 2024) and VTV (Xie et al., 2026), this task covers surface feature distinc-tion (SFD), surface optimality identification (SOI), object sensation correlation (OSC), and tactile sce-nario analysis (TSA), enabling stable quantitative comparison. (3) Open-ended tactile commonsense reasoning. It requires models to generate free-form responses for tactile phenomenon description, at-tribute explanation, and related reasoning tasks, as-sessing whether they can integrate tactile evidence with real-world commonsense rather than merely matching fixed templates. Detailed task definitions and examples are provided in the Appendix A.2.2. 

5 Methodology 

5.1 Tactile Action-aware Modeling 

As discussed in Section 1, tactile signals contain substantial redundancy, with task-relevant evidence concentrated in only a few action segments. Model-ing all frames indiscriminately amplifies represen-tational redundancy and hinders downstream rea-soning. To address this issue, we propose a tactile action-aware modeling mechanism that localizes query-relevant subintervals and extracts meaning-ful tactile representations, as shown in Figure 3. 

Question-Guided Token Fusion. Given a tactile video V = {It}Tt=1 , we first fine-tune a base tactile backbone ftac initialized from ViFi-CLIP (Rad-ford et al., 2021). Specifically, we attach an at-tribute classifier and optimize a cross-entropy loss to predict tactile attributes, including hardness, protrusion, elasticity, and friction. After train-ing, ftac is frozen and used to extract frame-wise tactile features, yielding a tactile token sequence 

F = [ f1, . . . , f T ] ∈ RT ×d. To incorporate task-specific priors, we encode the question q with a frozen text encoder ftxt (·), obtaining word-level features Qw ∈ RL×dt and a sentence-level feature 

qs ∈ Rdt , which are projected into the tactile space as ˜Qw = QwWw and ˜qs = qsWs. We then use tactile tokens as queries and word-level question features as keys and values for cross-modal atten-tion, followed by self-attention: 

Fqa = SelfAttn 



CrossAttn 



F, ˜Qw, ˜Qw

 

,

(1) The output Fqa ∈ RT ×d provides question-aware tactile representations that align temporal tactile cues with task semantics while suppressing irrel-evant noise (e.g., non-contact segments), thereby reducing tactile representational redundancy. 

Action-aware Gaussian Temporal MoE. To fur-ther focus on reasoning-relevant tactile evidence, we adapt the MoE framework by introducing a set of tactile experts, each specialized in distinct ac-tion patterns. Rather than discrete experts (Dai et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2026), we uses context-dependent routing weights to softly combine their contributions, capturing the continuous dynamics of tactile interactions. Specially, given the question-aware tactile tokens Fqa = [ fqa ,1, . . . , f qa ,T ], a question-driven router predicts the expert weights 

π = {πk}Kk=1 from the sentence-level question rep-resentation ˜qs. Each expert aggregates local tactile evidence through a Gaussian temporal window: 

fmoe =

> K

X

> k=1

πkTX

> t=1

αk,t Ek(fqa ,t ), (2) 

αk,t = Softmax t



− (ˆ τt − μk)2

2σ2

> k



, (3) Here, αk,t denotes the temporal attention weight assigned by the k-th expert to the t-th token, and 

ˆτt ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the normalized temporal posi-tion. The parameters μk and σk denote the center and width of the temporal window for the k-th ex-pert, respectively. They are generated from the D-dimensional question representation through a lin-ear layer, where the predicted center offset is added to an initial temporal center. This design enables the model to focus on relevant action segments and capture the action-specific nature of tactile, thereby supporting downstream tactile reasoning. 

5.2 Tactile-Language training paradigm 

In the previous section, we introduced a tactile action-aware mechanism for generating more ef-ficient tactile representations. We next propose a two-stage training paradigm that enables the LLM to integrate tactile and linguistic embeddings for multimodal reasoning and response generation. The training pipeline is illustrated in Figure 3. 

Stage I: Tactile-Text Alignment. In this stage, we align tactile encoder outputs with the LLM text embedding space through a tactile-language adapter, enabling the LLM to interpret tactile in-puts. Trained on TouchThinker-1M attribute ques-tion answering data, the adapter projects tactile rep-resentations into textual token embeddings while the LLM (Wu et al., 2025) remains frozen, focus-ing optimization on cross-modal alignment. Given a tactile video V and a text prompt p, the tactile embedding is computed as 

EV = Proj(Enc( V, p )) , (4) where Enc denotes the tactile encoder and Proj de-notes the tactile-language adapter. The LLM then generates a response ˆY = LLM ϕ(EV , p ) based on the tactile embedding and the text prompt. The Video Frames 

> Tactile -Language
> adapter
> Text
> Projector
> Large Language Model

Tactile -Text Alignment 

> Video Frames
> Tactile -Language
> adapter
> Text
> Projector
> Large Language Model

End -to -end Fine -tuning       

> Tactile
> Encoder
> LoRA
> Attribute QA
> •Reasoning QA
> •CoT QA
> •Open -end QA

Tactile Action -aware Modeling       

> CLIP
> Encoder
> Step 1: Tactile Encoder Fine -tuning
> Attribute
> Classifier
> Tactile
> Encoder
> CLIP
> Encoder
> Text
> Encoder
> Question
> Cross  Atten
> …
> Expert 1 Expert 2
> Self  Atten
> …
> …
> …
> Gaussian Generator
> Step 2: Action -Aware Enhancement
> …Router Trainable Frozen
> Aggregation
> Multiplication

Figure 3: Overview of the proposed TouchThinker framework and its training pipeline. 

model is trained by minimizing the autoregressive cross entropy loss: 

Lce = −E(V,p,Y )∼D align 

> M

X

> i=1

log πθ(yi | EV , p, y <i ),

(5) where Dalign is the attribute question answering dataset. Y = [ y1, . . . , y M ] is the target answer sequence, yi is the target token at position i, y<i 

denotes the preceding target tokens, and πθ denotes the predictive distribution. We use teacher forcing during training to stabilize tactile-text alignment. 

Stage II: End-to-end Supervised Fine-Tuning. 

In this stage, We perform LoRA-based super-vised fine-tuning on diverse instruction data, in-cluding chain-of-thought and open-ended ques-tion answering, to elicit evidence-driven and logically consistent tactile reasoning. To pre-serve stable perceptual representations, we freeze the tactile encoder and update only the tactile-language adapter and the LoRA parameters in-serted into the LLM self-attention layers. Each instruction instance is represented as (V, p, Y ),where V is a tactile video, p is the text prompt, and Y is the target output. For chain-of-thought instances, Y follows the structured format 

<think>...</think><answer>...</answer> , where the reasoning trace T precedes the final answer A.For open-ended question answering, Y is an open-format natural-language response. Under multi-format supervision, the model aligns dynamic tac-tile evidence with language-based reasoning. The supervised fine-tuning objective is defined as 

Lsft = −E(V,p,Y )∼D inst 

> M

X

> i=1

log πθ(yi | EV , p, y <i ),

(6) where Dinst denotes the instruction dataset contain-ing attribute question answering, chain-of-thought, and open-ended question answering instances. This stage strengthens alignment between tactile percep-tion and language reasoning, improving generaliza-tion in open-world tactile question answering. 

6 Experiments 

6.1 Settings Datasets. We conduct experiments on two bench-marks: the recently recognized VTV-150K (Xie et al., 2026) benchmark and our self-constructed TouchThinker-Bench. All test sets contain objects unseen during training, enabling comprehensive evaluation across diverse tactile reasoning tasks. In addition, TouchThinker-Bench further includes un-seen sensors to assess cross-sensor generalization. 

Implementation. All models are trained on four NVIDIA A100-80G GPUs with a batch size of 16. Tactile-language training follows a two-stage paradigm: Stage I trains the Tactile-Language Adapter on TouchThinker-1M attribute question-answering data using AdamW with a learning rate of 2 × 10 −4; Stage II fine-tunes the adapter and the LLM LoRA parameters on more complex question-answering data, including chain-of-thought and open-ended question answering, with the same op-timizer and learning rate. We set the LoRA scaling factor to 256, rank to 128, and maximum training steps to 10,000. The LLM backbone is Qwen2.5, including 7B and 14B (Wu et al., 2025). Additional details are provided in the Appendix A.3.1. 

Evaluation Metrics. For basic tactile property un-derstanding and reasoning, we report subtask-level accuracy by exactly matching the final conclusions, without considering reasoning processes or seman-tic equivalence. For open-ended questions, we mea-sure semantic similarity with METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) and use GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025) Table 1: Performance comparison of TouchThinker with state-of-the-art methods on the VTV-150K dataset. 

The evaluation covers multiple tasks, with results reported in percentages (%); boldface denotes the best performance. To ensure fair comparison and validate the effectiveness of our method, TouchThinker is trained and evaluated on VTV-150K following the same protocol (Xie et al., 2026), and results are reported as the average over multiple runs.                                                                                                                                    

> Models Hardness Protrusion Elasticity Friction Combined SFD SOI OSC TSA Average GPT-5 34.7 32.6 32.6 18.7 2.1 40.9 38.4 16.6 36.0 28.0 Gemini-2.5-Pro-Exp 36.2 34.7 39.1 21.0 4.3 42.6 29.4 18.5 40.0 29.5 LLaVA-OneVision-7B 27.5 32.6 26.0 20.2 0.7 40.9 28.2 11.7 30.0 24.2 LLaVA-Video-Qwen2-7B 30.4 29.7 28.9 18.1 2.1 33.6 29.4 17.2 36.0 25.0 InternVL2.5-VL-8B 18.1 23.9 21.0 13.7 0.0 24.5 17.9 11.1 24.0 17.1 VideoLLaMA3-7B 15.2 21.7 14.4 10.8 0.0 11.4 12.8 7.4 20.0 12.6 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 25.3 28.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 22.9 28.2 16.0 30.0 20.6 VTV-LLM-7B 73.9 75.0 67.3 56.5 35.6 71.3 57.6 43.2 64.0 60.4 VTV-LLM-14B 72.1 78.2 68.1 52.8 38.2 72.1 59.7 45.9 72.0 62.1
> TouchThinker-7B 79.1 80.8 75.3 63.4 40.7 78.9 64.2 50.7 74.0 67.4
> ∆(with VTV-LLM-7B) +5.2 +5.8 +8.0 +6.9 +5.1 +7.6 +6.6 +7.5 +10.0 +7.0
> TouchThinker-14B 81.2 77.1 78.2 61.5 46.4 80.5 68.3 52.9 80.0 69.5

and DeepSeek-V4 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) for multi-dimensional evaluation. 

6.2 Main Results 

The main experimental results demonstrate that TouchThinker scales tactile commonsense rea-soning to open-world scenarios with three key 

adv antages: [Adv.1] improved tactile property pre-diction and basic tactile commonsense reasoning, 

[Adv.2] accurate and coherent open-ended response generation, and [Adv.3] robust generalization to un-seen sensors and objects. 

[Adv.1] To ensure fair comparison and validate the effectiveness of our method, we follow the VTV-LLM evaluation protocol (Xie et al., 2026) and quantitatively compare TouchThinker with state-of-the-art models on 500 question-answer pairs sampled from VTV-150K. The results are sum-marized in Table 1. On Tactile Feature Analysis task, TouchThinker-7B outperforms VTV-LLM-7B by 5.2%, 5.8%, 8.0%, and 6.9% in hardness, bumpiness, elasticity, and friction prediction, re-spectively, demonstrating the effectiveness of its action-aware tactile representations. We further evaluate TouchThinker on basic tactile common-sense reasoning tasks, including SFD, SOI, OSC, and TSA. Compared with VTV-LLM-7B, Touch-Thinker consistently achieves performance gains. Notably, TouchThinker-7B also surpasses VTV-LLM-14B in overall performance and on most sub-tasks despite using substantially fewer parameters, highlighting its efficient tactile representation learn-ing and stronger reasoning capability. 

[Adv.2] Prior methods perform reasonably on tac-tile property prediction and templated reasoning, but their reliance on fixed answer spaces and ex-act matching limits the evaluation of open-world tactile explanation and reasoning. Following the implementation details described in Section 6.1, we further evaluate TouchThinker on TouchThinker-Bench for open-ended tactile question answering, using METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) and LLM-based evaluation. As shown in Table 2, Large-scale multi-source data and diversified QA training enable TouchThinker to reduce shallow semantic matching and spurious associations, pro-ducing responses that are better grounded in tactile evidence and more logically consistent. The qual-itative comparison in Figure 4 further shows that TouchThinker better interprets tactile signals, con-nects physical properties with real-world common-sense, and performs open-world tactile reasoning. 

[Adv.3] We evaluate state-of-the-art Touch-Language models on TouchThinker-Bench for tac-tile property prediction and basic tactile reasoning. Table 3 shows that TouchThinker remains robust to unseen sensors and objects, while Octopi and VTV-LLM degrade substantially. This indicates stronger adaptation to heterogeneous sensor imag-ing mechanisms, signal distributions, and object properties. This advantage stems from the large-scale, multi-source construction of TouchThinker-1M, which enables models to learn sensor-invariant tactile semantics rather than sensor-specific appear-ance biases, thereby improving generalization to unseen sensing platforms and open-world objects. 

7 Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablation studies to assess key com-ponents of TouchThinker, with additional results provided in the Appendix A.4. 

Impact of the Action-aware Modeling. As shown Table 2: Subtask performance comparison on TouchThinker-Bench. We evaluate the models’ open-ended tactile question-answering capabilities. The best results are in bold , and the second-best ones are underlined . TAU: Touch Attribute Understanding. TIU: Touch Interaction Understanding. TKU: Touch Knowledge Reasoning.                                                

> Model TAU TIU TKU METEOR GPT-5 DeepSeek-V4 METEOR GPT-5 DeepSeek-V4 METEOR GPT-5 DeepSeek-V4 Octopi-7B (Yu et al., 2024) 26.47 6.45 6.42 25.26 6.89 6.94 20.84 6.23 6.14 Octopi-13B (Yu et al., 2024) 31.43 7.58 7.87 24.41 7.11 7.79 26.76 6.39 6.87 VTV-LLM-7B (Xie et al., 2026) 27.93 6.53 6.64 27.45 6.87 6.91 22.17 6.19 6.12 TouchThinker-7B (Ours) 34.06 8.17 8.33 28.71 7.49 7.21 27.43 7.87 7.81

Table 3: Performance comparison on TouchThinker-Bench under unseen sensor and object. Other models suffer substantial performance degradation due to limited generalization, whereas our method maintains robustness. 

Models Hardness Protrusion Elasticity Friction Combined SFD SOI OSC TSA Average Octopi-7B 43.2 47.1 39.5 32.6 13.9 31.4 33.9 22.4 48.0 34.7 Octopi-13B 44.8 46.5 41.9 36.1 22.1 35.5 38.7 30.6 56.0 38.0 VTV-LLM-7B 59.2 60.1 62.8 46.5 28.4 51.6 43.5 39.7 52.0 49.3 

TouchThinker-7B 68.3 69.7 70.6 51.7 37.2 68.2 52.1 47.2 62.0 58.6 

Table 4: Ablation study of TouchThinker components. 

Settings SFD SOI OSC TSA Average w/o Action-aware Modeling 72.9 57.1 46.3 70.0 61.6 w/o stage 1 65.3 58.7 41.2 68.0 58.3 w/o stage 2 61.1 51.3 34.9 66.0 53.3 

Ours 78.9 64.2 50.7 74.0 67.0 Answer 

The object feels soft and cushioned when pressed, with 

the surface giving way under the finger and forming a

slight depression . After release, it seems to bounce 

back quickly like a resilient padding, making the touch 

feel plush , elastic , and smoothly recoverable .

Octopi -7B: 

VTV -LLM -7B: 

The object responds with gentle compression and a

smooth cloth -like feel as pressure is applied . Its surface 

seems slightly glossy and polished , so after pressing, the 

finger glides away easily with little resistance , giving the 

impression of a soft but slick synthetic material .

Ours (TouchThinker -7B): 

The object feels soft and compressible after being 

firmly pressed and released, but it is not springy . The 

pressed area keeps a slight indentation for a moment 

instead of bouncing back immediately , and its medium 

coarseness gives the finger enough grip to remain stable 

on the surface .

How does this object respond after being pressed 

firmly and released? 

> Object class:
> a microfiber cloth

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of responses from TouchThinker and other models. Errors are highlighted in red , while accurate content is marked in blue .

in Table 4, removing the action-aware mechanism leads to consistent performance degradation on both attribute prediction and reasoning tasks, due to the inherent redundancy and action specificity of tactile signals. In contrast, our action-aware Input Question: Is the object in the first video more protruded than the one in the second video?         

> Input Question  t=1 t=2 t=3 t=4 t=5
> t=1 t=2 t=3 t=4 t=5
> Tactile Gaussian 1
> Tactile Gaussian 2
> Yes !

Figure 5: Visualization of action-aware temporal weights from tactile Gaussian experts, integrated to fo-cus on question-relevant frames for accurate reasoning. 

mechanism optimizes tactile representations. To intuitively illustrate this effect, we present visual-izations in Figure 5. When the question is related to the protrusion attribute, the action-aware mecha-nism dynamically localizes pressing-related action segments, yielding efficient tactile representations and enhancing tactile understanding. 

Impact of the Training Paradigm. Table 4 vali-dates our two-stage training paradigm through ab-lation studies on VTV-150K. Removing Stage I leads to misalignment between tactile and textual tokens, reducing the average performance to 58.3%. Omitting Stage II removes end-to-end fine-tuning, destabilizes LLM token generation, and causes a sharp performance drop to 53.3%. These results confirm that progressive training is crucial for im-proving model capability. 

8 Conclusion 

In this work, we present TouchThinker, an open-world tactile-language reasoning framework that advances tactile reasoning from both data and methodological perspectives. First, we construct TouchThinker-1M, a million-scale multi-source vi-suotactile dataset, and TouchThinker-Bench, a real-istic benchmark for evaluating tactile understand-ing, commonsense reasoning, and cross-sensor gen-eralization. Then, TouchThinker employs a tac-tile action-aware modeling mechanism that com-bines question-guided fusion with action-aware Gaussian Temporal MoE to align tactile cues with task semantics, reduce redundancy, and focus on reasoning-relevant action segments. A two-stage tactile-language training paradigm further aligns tactile evidence with LLM-based reasoning. Ex-tensive experiments show that TouchThinker out-performs existing tactile-language models across benchmarks, with stronger robustness to unseen ob-jects and sensors. These results highlight the value of scalable tactile data and action-aware dynamics for reliable open-world tactile reasoning. 

9 Limitations 

Although TouchThinker demonstrates promising capability in tactile commonsense reasoning, sev-eral limitations remain. First, its supervision is constrained by the diversity of annotated tactile attributes. The current schema covers common and complementary attributes, including hardness, protrusion, elasticity, friction, and their combina-tions, while real-world tactile perception involves additional properties such as malleability and prick-liness. This may limit comprehensive tactile un-derstanding in open-world settings. Second, our current implementation focuses mainly on short-term tactile interactions. Since TouchThinker-1M primarily consists of 6 to 7 second contact clips, extending the framework to long-horizon tactile manipulation remains important for more com-plex tasks (Son et al., 2024; Tegin and Wikander, 2005). Third, TouchThinker is evaluated with 7B and 14B LLM backbones, whose computational cost increases with model scale and may hinder deployment on resource-constrained robotic plat-forms. Developing lightweight and accelerated variants is a promising direction for future work. 

10 Broader Impacts and Ethics Statement 

This work advances open-world tactile common-sense reasoning by aligning language models with tactile perception, enabling embodied agents to acquire more reliable and interpretable physical un-derstanding. It aligns with broader NLP interests in multimodal grounding, human-AI interaction, trustworthy evaluation, and responsible data cura-tion. Potential benefits include improved assistive technologies for visually impaired individuals and applications in manufacturing, quality control, and robotic manipulation (Liu et al., 2020). We also ac-knowledge potential ethical risks. (1) Tactile data may encode fine-grained information about object materials, interaction patterns, or usage contexts, raising privacy and sensitive-information concerns if improperly collected, stored, or released. (2) Al-though TouchThinker-1M integrates multi-source tactile data, its sensor types, object categories, and attribute space cannot fully capture real-world vari-ability, which may lead to generalization biases for low-resource sensors, rare materials, or safety-critical scenarios (Zhang et al., 2024b). To miti-gate these risks, we emphasize lawful data sources, standardized annotation, cross-sensor evaluation, and open-world generalization analysis, and rec-ommend further real-world validation of safety and feasibility before deployment. 

References          

> Alexander C Abad and Anuradha Ranasinghe. 2020. Visuotactile sensors with emphasis on gelsight sensor: A review. IEEE Sensors Journal , 20(14):7628–7638. Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved cor-relation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summariza-tion , pages 65–72. Ning Cheng, Jinan Xu, Jialing Chen, Bin Fang, and Wenjuan Han. 2026. Stola: Self-adaptive touch-language framework for tactile commonsense rea-soning in open-ended scenarios. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 40, pages 18198–18206. Heather Culbertson, Juan José López Delgado, and Katherine J Kuchenbecker. 2014. One hundred data-driven haptic texture models and open-source meth-ods for rendering on 3d objects. In 2014 IEEE hap-tics symposium (HAPTICS) , pages 319–325. IEEE. Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Chenggang Zhao, RX Xu, Huazuo Gao, Deli Chen, Jiashi Li, Wangding Zeng, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseek-moe: Towards ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 1280–1297. DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. Zehang Deng, Wanlun Ma, Qing-Long Han, Wei Zhou, Xiaogang Zhu, Sheng Wen, and Yang Xiang. 2025.

Exploring deepseek: A survey on advances, applica-tions, challenges and future directions. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , 12(5):872–893. Yifan Du, Zikang Liu, Junyi Li, and Wayne Xin Zhao. 2022. A survey of vision-language pre-trained mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10936 .Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. 2021. Taming transformers for high-resolution image syn-thesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12873–12883. Ruoxuan Feng, Jiangyu Hu, Wenke Xia, Tianci Gao, Ao Shen, Yuhao Sun, Bin Fang, and Di Hu. 2025. Anytouch: Learning unified static-dynamic represen-tation across multiple visuo-tactile sensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12191 .Ruohan Gao, Yiming Dou, Hao Li, Tanmay Agarwal, Jeannette Bohg, Yunzhu Li, Li Fei-Fei, and Jiajun Wu. 2023. The objectfolder benchmark: Multisensory learning with neural and real objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17276–17286. Carolina Higuera, Akash Sharma, Chaithanya Krishna Bodduluri, Taosha Fan, Patrick Lancaster, Mri-nal Kalakrishnan, Michael Kaess, Byron Boots, Mike Lambeta, Tingfan Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Sparsh: Self-supervised touch representations for vision-based tactile sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24090 .Md Farhan Ishmam, Md Sakib Hossain Shovon, Muhammad Firoz Mridha, and Nilanjan Dey. 2024. From image to language: A critical analysis of visual question answering (vqa) approaches, challenges, and opportunities. Information Fusion , 106:102270. Haoran Li, Yijiong Lin, Chenghua Lu, Max Yang, Efi Psomopoulou, and Nathan F Lepora. 2025. Clas-sification of vision-based tactile sensors: A review. 

IEEE Sensors Journal .Ming Li, Keyu Chen, Ziqian Bi, Ming Liu, Xinyuan Song, Zekun Jiang, Tianyang Wang, Benji Peng, Qian Niu, Junyu Liu, and 1 others. 2024a. Survey-ing the mllm landscape: A meta-review of current surveys. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18991 .Tong Li, Yuhang Yan, Chengshun Yu, Jing An, Yifan Wang, and Gang Chen. 2024b. A comprehensive review of robot intelligent grasping based on tactile perception. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Man-ufacturing , 90:102792. Bin Lin, Zhenyu Tang, Yang Ye, Jinfa Huang, Junwu Zhang, Yatian Pang, Peng Jin, Munan Ning, Jiebo Luo, and Li Yuan. 2026. Moe-llava: Mixture of ex-perts for large vision-language models. IEEE Trans-actions on Multimedia .Huaping Liu, Di Guo, Fuchun Sun, Wuqiang Yang, Steve Furber, and Tengchen Sun. 2020. Embodied tactile perception and learning. Brain Science Ad-vances , 6(2):132–158. Kailin Lyu, Long Xiao, Jianing Zeng, Junhao Dong, Xuexin Liu, Zhuojun Zou, Haoyue Yang, Lin Shu, and Jie Hao. 2026. Touchformer: A robust transformer-based framework for multimodal mate-rial perception. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 18496–18504. Mahmoud Meribout, Natnael Abule Takele, Olyad Derege, Nidal Rifiki, Mohamed El Khalil, Varun Tiwari, and Jing Zhong. 2024. Tactile sensors: A review. Measurement , 238:115332. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, and 1 others. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR. Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, and 1 oth-ers. 2025. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 .Changil Son, Jinyoung Kim, Dongwon Kang, Seojoung Park, Chaeyeong Ryu, Dahye Baek, Geonyoung Jeong, Sanggyun Jeong, Seonghyeon Ahn, Chanoong Lim, and 1 others. 2024. Behavioral biometric op-tical tactile sensor for instantaneous decoupling of dynamic touch signals in real time. Nature Commu-nications , 15(1):8003. Sudharshan Suresh, Haozhi Qi, Tingfan Wu, Taosha Fan, Luis Pineda, Mike Lambeta, Jitendra Malik, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Roberto Calandra, Michael Kaess, and 1 others. 2024. Neuralfeels with neural fields: Visuo-tactile perception for in-hand manipulation. Science Robotics , 9(96):eadl0628. Sudharshan Suresh, Zilin Si, Stuart Anderson, Michael Kaess, and Mustafa Mukadam. 2023. Midastouch: Monte-carlo inference over distributions across slid-ing touch. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 319–331. PMLR. Johan Tegin and Jan Wikander. 2005. Tactile sensing in intelligent robotic manipulation–a review. Industrial Robot: An International Journal , 32(1):64–70. Universal Robots. 2016. UR5 Technical Specifi-cations. https://www.universal-robots.com/ media/50588/ur5_en.pdf . Technical specifica-tions, Item no. 110105, EN 09/2016. Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng-ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 .Yifan Xie, Mingyang Li, Shoujie Li, Xingting Li, Guangyu Chen, Fei Ma, Fei Yu, and Wenbo Ding. 2026. Universal visuo-tactile video understanding for embodied interaction. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 38:127864–127883. Zhengtong Xu, Raghava Uppuluri, Xinwei Zhang, Cael Fitch, Philip Glen Crandall, Wan Shou, Dongyi Wang, and Yu She. 2025. Unit: Data efficient tactile representation with generalization to unseen objects. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters .Fengyu Yang, Chao Feng, Ziyang Chen, Hyoungseob Park, Daniel Wang, Yiming Dou, Ziyao Zeng, Xien Chen, Rit Gangopadhyay, Andrew Owens, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Binding touch to everything: Learning unified multimodal tactile representations. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26340–26353. Fengyu Yang, Chenyang Ma, Jiacheng Zhang, Jing Zhu, Wenzhen Yuan, and Andrew Owens. 2022. Touch and go: Learning from human-collected vision and touch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12498 .Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Tong Xu, and Enhong Chen. 2024. A survey on multimodal large language models. National Science Review , 11(12):nwae403. Samson Yu, Kelvin Lin, and Harold Soh. 2025. Demon-strating the octopi-1.5 visual-tactile-language model. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09985 .Samson Yu, Kelvin Lin, Anxing Xiao, Jiafei Duan, and Harold Soh. 2024. Octopi: Object property reasoning with large tactile-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02794 .Jingyi Zhang, Jiaxing Huang, Sheng Jin, and Shijian Lu. 2024a. Vision-language models for vision tasks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 46(8):5625–5644. Yichi Zhang, Yao Huang, Yitong Sun, Chang Liu, Zhe Zhao, Zhengwei Fang, Yifan Wang, Huanran Chen, Xiao Yang, Xingxing Wei, and 1 others. 2024b. Mul-titrust: A comprehensive benchmark towards trust-worthy multimodal large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:49279– 49383. Jialiang Zhao, Yuxiang Ma, Lirui Wang, and Edward H Adelson. 2024. Transferable tactile transformers for representation learning across diverse sensors and tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13640 .Yuhang Zheng, Songen Gu, Weize Li, Yupeng Zheng, Yujie Zang, Shuai Tian, Xiang Li, Ce Hao, Chen Gao, Si Liu, and 1 others. 2026. Omnivta: Visuo-tactile world modeling for contact-rich robotic manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19201 .

A Appendix 

A.1 Details of TouchThinker-1M Dataset A.1.1 Source Data of TouchThinker-1M 

TouchThinker-1M integrates nine tactile datasets across seven tactile sensing platforms, four ma-jor acquisition actions, and over 415 deduplicated objects, comprising 1,001,344 tactile frames in to-tal. Detailed object categories are provided in Fig-ure 11. We next provide an overview of the source datasets that constitute TouchThinker-1M. • VTV150K (Xie et al., 2026). It contributes 150,000 visuo-tactile video frames from 100 com-mon objects, manually captured with GelSight Mini, DIGIT, and Tac3D sensors through nor-mal pressing, rotational movement, and sliding motion. • PhysiCLEAR (Yu et al., 2024). It retains 48 everyday objects after duplicate removal and uses a GelSight var.1 tactile sensor for handheld pressing and rotation, comprising 29,211 tactile frames after curation. • Touch and Go (Yang et al., 2022). It spans 18 material categories, where human collectors probe real-world objects with a GelSight17 var.1 tactile sensor while recording egocentric video, comprising 28,300 tactile frames after curation. • TacQuad (Feng et al., 2025). It uses the coarse-grained spatially aligned subset covering 92 ob-jects, collected with GelSight Mini and DIGIT image-based tactile sensors through sequential handheld pressing at the same contact location with additional twisting motions, comprising 37,955 tactile frames after curation. • Touch-Slide (Higuera et al., 2024). It covers 9 toy-kitchen objects collected as human sliding in-teraction trajectories with a DIGIT tactile sensor, comprising 12,150 tactile frames after curation. • YCB-Slide (Suresh et al., 2023). YCB-Slide cov-ers 7 YCB objects collected by sliding a handheld DIGIT tactile sensor across fixed object surfaces and recording trajectories, comprising 9,450 tac-tile frames after curation. • FeelSight-Real (Suresh et al., 2024). It covers 5 real-world objects collected with four DIGIT vision-based tactile sensors mounted on the fin-gertips of an Allegro hand, using an in-hand ro-tation policy to record vision, touch, and propri-oception, comprising 21,000 tactile frames after curation. • ObjectFolder-Real (Gao et al., 2023). It cov-1.PHYSICLEAR           

> GelSight Mini, DIGIT, TAC3D 150K
> GelSight Mini , DIGIT
> 37.9K
> GelSight17 var.1 28.3K
> DIGIT 12.15K
> DIGIT 9.45K
> GelSight var.2
> 26.4K
> GelSight17 var.2
> 686.8K
> DIGIT 21K
> GelSight var.1 29.2K
> 2.VTV150K
> 3.TacQuad
> 4.Touch and Go
> 5.Touch -Slide
> 6.YCB -Slide
> 7.HaTT
> 8.FeelSight_Real
> 9.ObjectFolder_Real

Figure 6: Overview and representative examples of the source datasets in TouchThinker-1M. 

ers 70 real-world household object instances, collected with GelSight17 var.2 tactile sensors mounted on a Franka Emika Panda arm by con-tacting selected surface points along their normal directions and recording gel deformation, com-prising 686,880 tactile frames after curation. • HaTT (Culbertson et al., 2014). It covers 66 ma-terial textures using GelSight var.2 single-press videos augmented from the original HaTT dataset as tactile data, comprising 26,398 tactile frames after curation. 

A.1.2 Tactilc Instruction Data Synthesis Template-based instructions. Following Oc-topi (Yu et al., 2024) and VTV-LLM (Xie et al., 2026), we construct template-based tactile instruc-tions by instantiating predefined templates with attribute labels and tactile descriptions. The gener-ated data cover basic tactile property understand-ing and question-answering tasks, including tactile feature analysis (TFA), surface feature distinction (SFD), surface optimality identification (SOI), ob-ject sensation correlation (OSC), and tactile sce-nario analysis (TSA), enabling models to learn tactile-semantic correspondences across surface properties, object sensations, and interaction con-texts. However, this template-driven paradigm is constrained by template coverage and expressive-ness; its fixed wording and label-based supervision may encourage shallow correlations rather than grounded tactile reasoning. 

Tactile Chain-of-Thought Instructions. Prior work (Yu et al., 2024, 2025; Xie et al., 2026) mainly relies on attribute classification or template-based question answering, yielding discrete labels or brief responses without explicitly modeling contact dy-namics or causal dependencies. This limitation induces shallow tactile-semantic associations. To address it, we construct a high-quality tactile chain-of-thought reasoning dataset grounded in intrinsic object-state changes during dynamic tactile interac-tions. The construction pipeline is detailed below. 

Stage 1 : Data Preparation. We first curate tactile videos collected under a unified acquisition proto-col, retaining key contact and motion segments that reveal object-property variations. We then standard-ize task metadata, including question categories, task instructions, and answer annotations, to pro-vide a consistent training format. Stage 2 : Chain-of-Thought Generation. We reformulate tactile understanding as cross-modal question answering and attribute-description generation. Using prede-fined prompt templates, we guide a large language model (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) to generate reasoning traces grounded in deformation dynamics, contact-region changes, and geometric or texture cues ob-served in tactile videos. Each output is organized as 

> ...<think>...</think><answer>...</answer>

, where the reasoning is aligned with key interaction phases and the answer summarizes the inferred physical property. Stage 3 : Manual Filtering. We conduct consistency checking and manual review to ensure data quality. Samples are discarded if their rea-soning fails to capture key interaction stages or if the intermediate reasoning conflicts with the final answer, thereby preserving logical consistency be-tween chain-of-thought supervision and attribute prediction. Stage 4 : Formatting and Data Inte-gration. Finally, we integrate tactile videos, task annotations, structured prompts, chain-of-thought texts, and final answers into a unified training-ready format. This standardized pipeline enables super-vision for dynamic tactile reasoning and improves tactile understanding and decision reliability in open-world scenarios. 

Open-ended Tactile QA Instructions. To enhance semantic understanding and interaction-oriented reasoning in open-ended tactile scenarios, we con-struct tactile instruction data in an open-ended question-answering format, enabling models to learn aligned mappings from tactile context to lan-guage responses. Inspired by Cheng et al. (Cheng et al., 2026), we design an automated genera-Tactile Context 

> Detailed description: The touched object is a sponge. When pressed, its porous body collapses
> noticeably and then springs back with clear force. The open -cell surface feels mildly uneven, and the
> soft, grippy material produces strong drag during lateral contact.
> Attribute description: highly deformable; moderate protrusion; strong elasticity; strong friction

Conversation   

> Question: What surface texture is perceived during contact?
> Answer: The surface feels porous and mildly uneven rather than smooth. During lateral contact, it produces noticeable drag, a nd the
> open -cell structure gives a clear sense of small texture variations across the surface.
> Question: How does the object respond under applied pressure?
> Answer: The object deforms readily under pressure. Even a light press causes clear compression, indicating high deformability an d a
> soft tactile response.
> Question: How stable is the grip during contact?
> Answer: The grip is relatively stable. Strong friction and the material's ability to conform to the fingers help maintain con tac t and
> reduce slipping during handling.
> Question: What rebound response occurs after compression?
> Answer: A clear rebound is perceived after compression. The material quickly recovers its shape, producing strong elastic fee dba ck
> after pressure is released.
> Question: Which tactile cue is most prominent during interaction?
> Answer: The most prominent tactile cue is the combination of strong compressibility, elastic recovery, and high surface drag.
> Together, these cues form a distinctive porous and resilient tactile profile.

Figure 7: Example of an open-ended tactile instruction instance in TouchThinker-1M, where multi-granularity tactile context is used to construct grounded conversations about physical properties and touch-based interaction reasoning. 

tion pipeline based on the raw tactile data in TouchThinker-1M. This pipeline builds on object-level tactile data, object identifiers, and manually annotated tactile attribute descriptions, and uses DeepSeek-V4 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) to generate instruction-following samples for tactile interac-tion. Specifically, we generate open-ended tactile question-answering data from two complementary perspectives: intrinsic tactile attributes, including hardness, protrusion, elasticity, and friction, and interaction-oriented perceptual experiences, includ-ing graspability, pressure feedback, surface discrim-inability, and manipulation stability. This design covers both low-level tactile properties and realistic touch-based reasoning scenarios. We first construct an exemplar pool, where each exemplar contains a tactile context and a grounded dialogue, as illus-trated in Figure 7. The tactile context consists of detailed and attribute-level descriptions, and only question-answer pairs explicitly supported by the given tactile evidence are retained. For each tar-get sample, we use its tactile context as the query and retrieve semantically relevant exemplars as few-shot demonstrations. Because TouchThinker-1M organizes tactile samples, object identifiers, and attribute descriptions at the object level, the retrieved demonstrations help align generated re-sponses with the corresponding tactile evidence. The complete prompt construction is shown in Fig-ure 8. We then convert model outputs into single-turn conversations and manually review and correct them, yielding 5,000 touch-language instruction-following samples. 

A.2 Details of TouchThinker-Bench A.2.1 Source Data of TouchThinker-Bench 

TouchThinker-Bench consists of two components. The first is derived from the predefined test splits of TouchThinker-1M and contains objects held out from training, enabling evaluation of model gen-eralization to novel objects. The second targets cross-sensor transfer, comprising DuraGel data from the original TacQuad (Feng et al., 2025) test split, whose sensor is absent during training, as well as our self-constructed dataset and VisGel (Zhao et al., 2024), collected with the unseen commer-cial GelSight Mini and GelSight Var. 3 sensors, respectively. Overall, TouchThinker-Bench cov-ers 10 tactile sensors and 82 test objects, spanning both unseen-object and unseen-sensor settings to provide a comprehensive evaluation of tactile per-ception, attribute reasoning, and cross-sensor gen-eralization. We provide a detailed description of each component below. 

Cross-object generalization evaluation. It con-sists of multiple existing tactile datasets from the test portion of TouchThinker-1M, as shown in Fig-ure 9(b). The PhysiCLEAR (Yu et al., 2024) por-System Prompt 

> messages = [{"role": "system", "content": f"""You are an AI tactile expert interacting with a single touched object. The input provides the tactile context of this object, which contains two complementary descriptions of the same object: a detailed description and an attribute description. When answering all questions, treat the tactile context as the information perceived during contact. Design a conversation between you and a person asking about the touched object. The questions should be diverse, and the answers must be grounded only in the given tactile context. The conversation should include questions about the object 's physical tactile properties, such as hardness, protrusion, elasticity, friction, and related aspects. Only ask questions that can be clearly answered from the tactile context or answered reliably. Also include complex questions related to the touched object, such as questions involving tactile commonsense or interaction and perception during touch. These questions may discuss graspability, pressure feedback, surface discriminability, manipulation stability, and related aspects. Do not ask about uncertain details. Complex answers should be more detailed, clearly structured, and supported by examples or reasoning when necessary."""}]

Figure 8: Prompt template for generating open-ended tactile instruction data in TouchThinker-1M. The system prompt guides the model to synthesize evidence-grounded, touch-centric dialogues from the supplied tactile context, covering low-level tactile attributes and higher-level interaction-aware perceptual reasoning. DuraGel GelSight var.3 GelSight mini 

commercial version   

> DIGIT
> GelSight var.2
> GelSight17
> var.2
> DIGIT
> GelSight Mini,
> DIGIT,
> Tac3D
> GelSight17
> var.1
> DIGIT
> GelSight
> var.1

(a) 

(b) 

TacQuad 

# …… 

Self -constructed 

Dataset 

VisGel 

Unseen 

objects 

Unseen 

sensors 

Figure 9: Overview and representative examples of TouchThinker-Bench. (a) The unseen-sensor split consists of tactile sensors absent from the training set, including DuraGel from TacQuad (Feng et al., 2025), the commercial GelSight Mini from our self-constructed dataset, and GelSight Var. 3 from VisGel (Zhao et al., 2024). These sensors exhibit varying degrees of domain shift from the training sensors in imaging mechanism, color distribution, and gel deformation characteristics, enabling evaluation of cross-sensor generalization. (b) The unseen-object split consists of objects withheld from training, evaluating whether models can generalize to open-world objects with unseen tactile appearances and physical properties. 

tion is collected with a GelSight var.1 tactile sensor and contains 5 daily objects in the test set; the VTV-150K (Xie et al., 2026) portion is collected with three tactile sensors, including GelSight Mini, DIGIT, and Tac3D, and contains 5 common ob-jects; the Touch and Go (Yang et al., 2022) por-tion is collected with a GelSight17 var.1 tactile sensor and contains 18 material surfaces; the YCB-Slide (Suresh et al., 2023) portion is collected with a DIGIT tactile sensor and contains 3 YCB ob-jects; the Touch-Slide (Higuera et al., 2024) portion is collected with a DIGIT tactile sensor and con-tains 3 toy-kitchen objects; the HaTT (Culbertson et al., 2014) portion is collected with a GelSight var.2 tactile sensor and contains 9 material tex-tures; the FeelSight-Real (Suresh et al., 2024) por-tion is collected with four DIGIT visuotactile sen-sors mounted on the fingertips of an Allegro hand and contains 1 real object; and the ObjectFolder-Real (Gao et al., 2023) portion is collected with GelSight17 var.2 tactile sensor and contains 9 real household object. 

Cross-sensor generalization evaluation. It con-sists of data collected with three tactile sensors un-seen during training, as shown in Figure 9(a). The TacQuad subset is collected using the DuraGel tac-tile sensor and contains 15 test objects (Feng et al., 2025), while the VisGel subset is collected using the unseen GelSight Var. 3 tactile sensor (Zhao et al., 2024) and includes 4 objects. To further assess performance in real-world deployment sce-narios, we additionally collected tactile data for 10 categories of everyday objects using a UR5 robotic arm (Universal Robots, 2016) equipped with the commercial GelSight Mini sensor. 

A.2.2 Task Types Basic Tactile Property Understanding. This task evaluates whether models can identify fundamen-tal tactile attributes, including hardness, roughness, elasticity, and friction. The evaluation covers both unseen sensors and unseen objects, thereby assess-ing the generalization ability of tactile representa-tions across sensor domains and object categories. 

Basic Tactile Reasoning. Following prior bench-marks such as Octopi (Yu et al., 2024) and VTV-LLM (Xie et al., 2026), this task includes surface feature distinction (SFD), surface optimality identi-fication (SOI), object sensation correlation (OSC), and tactile scenario analysis (TSA). These tasks en-able standardized quantitative comparison of mod-els’ tactile reasoning capabilities. 

Open-ended tactile commonsense reasoning. We construct open-ended tactile question-answering samples from TouchThinker-Bench using tactile images and their category labels. Specifically, we design a unified prompt template for three task types and use category labels and tactile at-tribute cues as conditional inputs to DeepSeek-V4 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) for generating candidate question-answer pairs, followed by manual veri-fication. The benchmark covers Touch Attribute Understanding, Touch Interaction Understanding, and Touch Knowledge Reasoning. These tasks re-spectively evaluate models’ ability to recognize ba-sic tactile properties, such as hardness, protrusion,                     

> Configuration Stage I Stage II
> Optimizer AdamW AdamW Learning Rate 2e-4 2e-4 Weight Decay 0.001 0.001 Training Epochs 11Warmup Ratio 0.1 0.1 Learning Rate Scheduler Linear Linear Batch Size Per GPU 16 16 Maximum Token Length 512 512 Unfreeze LLM ✗✓
> Table 5: Training configurations for the two-stage train-ing paradigm. Stage I: Tactile-Text Alignment. Stage II: End-to-end Supervised Fine-Tuning.

elasticity, and friction; reason about interaction-related characteristics, such as graspability, pres-sure feedback, surface discriminability, and ma-nipulation stability; and infer higher-level tactile knowledge, including material properties, usage patterns, and everyday interaction scenarios, by in-tegrating tactile cues with object categories. As shown in Figure 10, each question is queried inde-pendently to avoid unstable formatting and answer-segmentation errors when generating multiple long-form responses. We then parse, deduplicate, and format the model outputs into single-turn tactile question-answering samples. Finally, we conduct manual review and correction to ensure that each question is supported by tactile and category in-formation and that the reference answers are con-sistent with the corresponding objects’ tactile at-tributes and interaction characteristics. 

A.3 Details of Implementation A.3.1 Configuration and Hyperparameters 

We present the detailed training configuration and hyperparameters in the two stages in Table 5. 

A.3.2 GPT-5 and DeepSeek-V4 scoring 

Since TouchThinker-Bench is designed for open-ended and free-form tactile commonsense reason-ing, model responses may vary substantially in wording, level of detail, and reasoning style. There-fore, conventional n-gram-based metrics such as CIDEr and BLEU-4 are insufficient to fully capture the quality of generated answers. To provide a more comprehensive evaluation, we report METEOR as a semantic-similarity-oriented metric and further employ GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025) and DeepSeek-V4 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026) as automatic judges for multidimensional response assessment. Specifically, each generated response is evalu-ated from five perspectives: semantic correctness, Open-ended Tactile QA Prompt 

Text Context 

You are an AI tactile assistant interacting with a single touched object. You will understand the touched object from the text prompt, where the object class is 

<object class> . Imagine that you are physically touching this object. Design conversations between you and a person asking about this object. The answers should be written in a tone indicating that you are touching the object and answering based on tactile perception. All answers must be based on the confirmed tactile attribute tendencies and the object class, and should not introduce details that cannot be supported by the given information. 

Object Class 

a microfiber cloth 

Task Specific Prompt Type 1: Touch Attribute Understanding 

Include questions asking about the typical tactile physical properties of the touched object, including hardness, protrusion, elasticity, and friction. Design a separate conversation for each tactile attribute. Ensure that the conversations contain only confirmed information. Required format: 

[{"question": "<question 1>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 2>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 3>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 4>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 5>", "answer": "<answer>"} ]

Task Specific Prompt Type 2: Touch Interaction Understanding 

Include questions asking about interaction and perception characteristics during touch, including graspability, pressure feedback, surface discriminability, and manipulation stability. Randomly select three of these interaction and perception characteristics, and design a separate conversation for each. Each conversation should include one question and 3–5 corresponding ground-truth answers. Ensure that the conversations contain only confirmed information. Required format: 

[{"question": "<question 1>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 2>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 3>", "answer": "<answer>"} ]

Task Specific Prompt Type 3: Touch Knowledge Reasoning 

Include complex reasoning questions involving background knowledge related to the touched object, emphasizing the tactile perspective. Design two conversations. Each conversation should include one question and 3–5 candidate ground-truth answers, with each answer being independent and self-contained. Ensure that the conversations contain only confirmed information. Provide more detailed answers for complex questions. For example, include concrete examples or reasoning steps to make the content more convincing and well-organized. Multiple paragraphs may be used if necessary. Required format: 

[{"question": "<question 1>", "answer": "<answer>"}, {"question": "<question 2>", "answer": "<answer>"} ]

Figure 10: Prompt template for open-ended question answering in TouchThinker-Bench. The upper section presents the multimodal input to DeepSeek-V4 (DeepSeek-AI, 2026), including a textual prompt and its paired visual input. 

tactile consistency, commonsense and reasoning plausibility, information completeness, and lan-guage quality. For each dimension, the judge as-signs a score from 1 to 10 and provides a brief rationale. The final score is computed as the aver-age of the five dimension-level scores: 

S = 15

5X

i=1 

si, (7) where si denotes the score of the i-th evaluation dimension. The evaluation dimensions are defined as follows: • Semantic Correctness: Whether the response is semantically consistent with the reference answer and free from factual errors. • Tactile Consistency: Whether the response accurately reflects tactile perception, physical properties, or interaction-related sensations, and whether it is consistent with the provided tactile information. • Commonsense and Reasoning Plausibility: 

Whether the response accords with real-world physical commonsense and presents a reasonable and convincing reasoning process. • Information Completeness: Whether the re-sponse covers the key information required by the question and avoids omitting important tactile attributes or explanations. • Language Quality: Whether the response is clear, natural, and fluent, without obvious gram-matical or expression errors. Question-Guided Gaussian SFD SOI OSC TSA Avg. Token Fusion Temporal MoE                 

> ✓✓78.9 64.2 50.7 74.0 67.0
> ✓73.4 51.6 42.2 70.0 59.1
> ✓71.2 52.9 45.8 72.0 60.5

Table 6: Ablation study of Question-Guided Token Fu-sion and Gaussian Temporal MoE in the action-aware modeling mechanism. 

A.4 Additional Ablation Studies Impact of the model scale. To investigate the impact of model scale on visuotactile understand-ing, we evaluate LLM backbones of varying sizes and report the performance of TouchThinker with Qwen-2.5-14B, as shown in Table 1. The results demonstrate consistent improvements across most subtasks as model size increases, with especially significant improvements on reasoning-oriented tasks such as SFD. 

Impact of Question-Guided Token Fusion and Gaussian Temporal MoE in the Action-Aware Modeling Mechanism. We conduct ablation exper-iments on VTV-150K to validate the effectiveness of the two core components in our action-aware modeling mechanism. As shown in Table 6, both components contribute to tactile reasoning perfor-mance. Removing Question-Guided Token Fusion prevents the model from incorporating task seman-tics during tactile feature aggregation, leading to less focused temporal representations and degraded reasoning accuracy. Removing Gaussian Tempo-ral MoE also leads to performance degradation, indicating that uniform temporal modeling is insuf-ficient for capturing action-specific tactile evidence. In contrast, combining Question-Guided Token Fu-sion with Gaussian Temporal MoE achieves the best overall performance. This demonstrates that early question-aware fusion helps suppress irrel-evant tactile segments, while Gaussian Temporal MoE further localizes task-relevant action intervals, enabling more efficient tactile representations and stronger downstream reasoning. Object Categories in TouchThinker-1M 

tangerine, carton, playing card, orange, spoon with rice, nectarine, tomato, rubber glove, pen pad, cotton cloth, velvet, sandpaper, chip bag, rubber slipper sole, candle, suede, silk scarf, fascia ball, chalk, clay, avocado, lemon, banana, kiwi, pineapple, plastic bottle, waffle, sponge, plastic basket, balloon, leather glove, building block protrusion, jelly, piano key, blanket, ceramic cup, oven glove, bark, scouring pad, fur, pine cone, ping pong ball, plastic building block, cork, wooden ruler, eraser, velcro, leather wallet, toilet paper roll, shower mat, baseball, golf ball, sticky note, silicone pad, yoga mat, masking tape roll, rubber band, cotton ball, gauze, computer mouse, headphone, face towel, woven watch strap, rubber watch strap, metal watch strap, wooden block, marble, claw, keyboard, remote control button, toothbrush head, vitamin tablet, tennis ball, towel, absorbent cloth, wrist guard, fine bubble film, coarse bubble film, rice, ridge cup, key, screw, circuit board, mold, sponge sheet, wrench, screwdriver handle, aluminum tube, hairpin, steel wool, huamei, candy, grid bag, ridged plastic bottle, scissors, iron ruler, iron clip, tape, injection tube, wire, scissors handle, dishwashing cloth, mesh strainer scoop, toothbrush handle, scissors blade, TV remote back, pillow, disposable water bottle, game controller thumbstick, tissue paper, mop head, rice spatula handle, game controller buttons, hairbrush bristles, leather book cover, bread knife handle, card holder, stress ball, feather duster head, toilet brush handle, potato, paper towel, game controller shoulder buttons, lanyard, insulating holder, basket, rubber slippers, rice spatula scoop, aluminium foil, pen barrel, mesh strainer handle, egg, game controller keypad, bread knife blade, game controller body, bubble wrap, ice block, clothes peg, TSA lock numbers, millet, nylon shirt, feather duster handle, jeans, microfiber cloth, hairbrush handle, toilet brush bristles, hairbrush bristle ends, bath towel, concrete surface, plastic surface, glass surface, wooden surface, metal surface, brick surface, tile surface, leather surface, synthetic fabric surface, rubber surface, paper surface, tree bark surface, grass surface, soil surface, rock surface, gravel surface, sand surface, plant surface, 3D-printed object, USB connector, vacuum cup, vacuum cup lid, glass jar, bowl edge, bowl handle, metal can, metal can bottom, metal can top, CD, coffee cup bottom edge, cup shell edge, cup shell interior, glass bottle, hot dog, red metal box, metal box edge, plush toy, metal box, mouse scroll wheel, onion, paper cup, peach, pencil box, pill bottle bottom edge, pill bottle cap, plastic bottle cap, plastic box bottom, duck toy beak, duck toy wing, rubber rabbit toy, rubber rabbit ear, rubber ball, shampoo bottle, glove, sponge brush handle, sponge brush, spoon, plastic box, plastic cup, plastic glove, tomato leaf, wooden cup, rubber toy, shuttlecock feather, marble slab, bamboo surface, bicycle basket, bicycle handle, bicycle pedal, bicycle seat, bicycle wheel, stone, block-patterned carpet, board brush, cable path, chair, desk, door handle, file envelope, glass door, hinge, bamboo leaf, metal post, metal sign, metal block, paper board, plastic chair, post box, tree branch, stone surface, stone pier, stopcock, tube, van surface, wall corner, well cap, wooden stair surface, wall surface, column, bowl, bowl bottom, coffee cup bottom, grape, paper bag, plastic box bottom edge, fiber chair, lock, metal net, metal stair surface, roadblock, toy banana, toy cheese, toy corn, toy lettuce, toy strawberry, toy tomato, toy bread, toy cookie, toy plum, mustard bottle, cleanser bottle, mug, power drill, hammer, sugar box, tomato soup can, salad plate, dinner plate, hair comb, decorative plate, soup ladle, salad fork, frying spatula, 8-inch skillet, 10.25-inch skillet, 10.5-inch griddle, dutch oven, dutch oven lid, rinsing cup, hand scoop, shovel toy, round plate, square plate, cutting board, wine glass, drinking cup, portion cup, cake pan, loaf pan, pestle, mortar, sculpture, ladle, spatula, decorative cast, small fork, large fork, soap dish, beer glass, large container, medium container, small container, vase, plate handle, plate, plate base, display stand, drop funnel, container lid, food pan, large flowerpot, small flowerpot, green vase, blue vase, orange vase, large swan, small swan, spoon holder, utensil container, potato masher, skimmer, pasta server, solid turner, slotted turner, green glass, red glass, scoop, box lid, Stanford frisbee, kettlebell, trim removal tool, bell pepper, dice, pear, pepper grinder, Rubik’s cube, ABS plastic, aluminum, artificial grass, athletic shirt fabric, balsa wood, binder, brick, bubble envelope, CD sleeve, canvas, carbon fiber, ceramic, acrylic, coffee filter, cotton, dot paper, EPDM foam, felt, file portfolio, flannel, fleece, floor tile, wooden floor, folder, frosted acrylic, gift box, glitter paper, greeting card, leather back, leather front, MDF, metal foil, metal mesh, metal shelving, foam, wood, nylon bag, nylon mesh, nylon strap, package foam, painted brick, painted wood, green painted wood, pink foam, plastic mesh, pleather, polyethylene foam, portfolio cover, resin carbon fiber, resume paper, rough paper plate, silk, smooth paper plate, stained wood, stone tile, styrofoam, tarp, terra cotta, textured cloth, textured metal, textured paper, textured rubber, tissue paper, vinyl, wax paper, whiteboard. 

Figure 11: Object categories in TouchThinker-1M. The figure lists object categories after removing articles, dataset sources, and non-essential descriptive modifiers for compact presentation.