Title: The N2D Haptic Glove: A Multi-Finger Glove for 2D Directional Force Feedback for Contact Rich Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14083v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:35:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# The N2D Haptic Glove: A Multi-Finger Glove for 2D Directional Force Feedback for Contact Rich Manipulation 

Yao-Ting Huang †,1, Jake Honma †,2, Omar Hernandez †,1, Logan Li †,3, Kaitlin Calimbahin †,1, Bryce Hackel 1,Michael C. Yip 1, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract — Humans rely on directional fingertip forces to probe and regulate contact during manipulation, yet most wearable haptic gloves render only vibration or single-axis force, leaving force direction ambiguous. Without directional cues, users must infer contact force from vision alone, often leading to over-pressing, inconsistent control, and reduced precision in robotic teleoperation. We present the N2D Haptic Glove, a multi-finger wearable device that renders planar flexion-extension fingertip forces using capstan-drive transmis-sions for high-transparency force feedback. Through benchtop validations and a user study involving haptic teleoperation of a robotic arm and hand, we demonstrate that compared to visual-only and single-axis haptic baselines, planar finger-tip feedback significantly reduces contact force error during precise manipulation, improves trial-to-trial consistency, and enhances overall user experience in axial probing tasks. These findings establish the N2D Haptic Glove and directional finger-based haptics devices as a promising modality for contact-rich teleoperation, immersive virtual reality simulations, and robot learning from demonstrations. N2D Haptic Glove’s hardware and software system will be fully open-sourced at https://ucsdarclab.github.io/n2d-glove/. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Haptic devices have been widely utilized in immersive contexts, ranging from interacting with virtual reality (VR) environments to teleoperating robotic surgical systems for minimally invasive surgery. Recent interest in using human demonstrations to train robot imitation learning policies requires human teleoperators to control manipulators within real or virtual worlds, where haptic feedback has been shown to collect tighter and more informed distributions of trajectories [1]. With the rise of the humanoid form factor for robotics, a key challenge has been developing effective control methods for robotic hands. While recent VR-based teleoperation sys-tems enable dexterous control through visual feedback [2], the absence of haptic cues limits operators’ ability to regulate contact forces and avoid errors [3]. To address this, existing haptic gloves provide cable-driven flexion resistance [4–6] and fingertip-mounted cutaneous feedback [7, 8]. Directional haptic rendering in finger interactions remains underdeveloped. In this work, we define transverse forces as those aligned with finger flexion/extension at the finger     

> †Equal contribution.
> 1Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
> 2Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
> 3Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Fig. 1: The N2D Haptic Glove: is the first, multi-fingered glove design that offers 2D force feedback along the axial direction of multiple fingers. The glove provides multi-directional haptic rendering, an integral feedback capability for tasks requiring probing, gentle grasping, slip detection, etc., which rely on directional forces. pad, and axial forces as those acting along the length of the finger, such as during poking. Consider moving a finger through a cluttered set of objects: the perception of axial forces at the finger tip can be just as vital — if not more so — than transverse forces generated along the closing grasping direction. Accurate perception of both is essential for contact-rich manipulation tasks, including probing, gentle grasping, and slip detection. A current indirect approach to approximate directional feedback is to use skin-shear on a held device [9], [10]; however, delivering axial force feedback directly to individ-ual fingertips is arguably more natural and interpretable. In this paper, we present the first wearable haptic in-terface with on-hand actuation capable of rendering planar kinesthetic forces at multiple finger tips (Fig. 1). Named the N2D Haptic Glove — for N fingers and 2D force rendering per finger — doubling the DOF per finger of active force-feedback over existing designs, with applications in robot teleoperation, VR simulations, and imitation learning. The key novel contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) The first multi-fingered haptic glove capable of deliv-

> arXiv:2606.14083v1 [cs.RO] 12 Jun 2026

TABLE I: Comparison of Fingertip-Feedback Systems                                 

> #Feature SenseGlove R1 HaptGlove DOGlove NURing Fluid Reality AirPush N2D Glove 1Multi-DOF Fingertip Forces ✗✗✗✓✗✓✓
> 2Kinesthetic Force Feedback ✓✓✓✓✗✗✓
> 3Multi-Digit (simultaneous) ✓✓✓✗✓✗✓

ering planar force feedback to the finger, 2) Design of the N2D Haptic Glove to achieve high transparency through low-friction, zero-backlash trans-missions for clean, accurate haptic rendering, 3) Validation of 2D planar directional feedback ability with benchtop testing, and 4) Demonstrating the benefits of N2D Haptic Glove’s directional haptics in a teleoperation user study. II. R ELATED WORKS 

In the realm of fingertip haptics, existing wearable in-terfaces can be grouped by the combination of features they support: multi-DOF fingertip forces, kinesthetic force feedback, and multi-digit actuation. Several devices render controllable force directions at the fingertip but are generally limited to single-finger designs. Skin-stretch devices generate tangential cues through multi-directional deformation of the fingerpad [7], [11], [12]. AirPush demonstrates multi-directional fingertip forces using compressed air with 2-DOF control [13]. Similarly, the NURing delivers two-dimensional kinesthetic deflection cues via tendon-driven actuation on the index finger [14]. These designs achieve directional rendering but cannot scale to multi-finger use cases such as dexterous grasping. A second class of devices provides feedback across mul-tiple fingers but is limited to cutaneous stimulation with-out kinesthetic force. Vibrotactile actuators simulate contact events and palpation cues through fingertip-mounted vibra-tion pads [15], [16]. Fluid Reality achieves high-resolution pressure rendering across five fingertips using pump arrays [17]. These approaches offer rich tactile information but cannot reproduce the sustained, directional forces needed for precise manipulation. Several integrated glove systems target multi-finger kines-thetic feedback. SenseGlove R1 delivers four-finger resis-tance through an active force-feedback exoskeleton [6]. Dexmo provides multi-digit resistive feedback through a link-bar exoskeleton [18]. DOGlove provides five-finger ac-tive force feedback augmented with vibrotactile sensing at a low cost [5]. HaptGlove combines pneumatic clutches with skin indenters across all five fingers [19]. While each system delivers active kinesthetic force feedback across multiple fingers, all restrict fingertip forces to a single axis without directional rendering. Collectively, these systems represent significant progress across individual dimensions of haptic feedback, but none combine directional fingertip forces, kinesthetic resistance, and multi-digit coverage in a single device. The N2D Haptic Glove addresses this gap (Table I). III. M ETHODS 

The following sections describe: (A) the mechanical de-sign of the N2D Haptic Glove linkage system, (B) the electromechanical framework, (C) kinematic analysis of the glove, and (D) a 2D planar haptic feedback rendering ap-proach for multi-fingered force reflectance. 

A. Mechanical Design Overview 

The N2D Haptic Glove is designed to preserve the natural biomechanical DOFs of the hand. Following established models [20], the MCP joint is treated as a saddle joint allowing flexion-extension and adduction-abduction, while the PIP and DIP joints are modeled as revolute joints constrained to flexion-extension. The thumb additionally performs opposition at the TMC joint. The thumb, index, and middle fingers are central to most grasping and probing tasks due to their roles in precision and stability. The device consists of three modular finger subsystems mounted along a structural backbone. Each subsystem uses a crossed four-bar linkage with an additional link to per-mit full flexion-extension while enabling 2D planar force feedback. Planar fingertip forces are generated by actuating the proximal links via capstan cable drives (see Kinematic Modeling). Each linkage is mounted on a passive rotary joint for finger abduction-adduction, with the thumb having an additional passive joint for TMC opposition. The resulting 2-DOF planar formulation provides physiologically grounded kinematics while enabling controlled directional force feed-back at each fingertip (Fig. 2), consistent with validated models of lateral pinch [21]. Beyond directional force feedback, the glove prioritizes haptic transparency. All active DOFs are actuated via cap-stan drives powered by brushless motors, avoiding geared transmissions that introduce backlash, friction, and damping. Actuators are mechanically grounded at the base of the linkage system, preventing motor masses from rotating about the finger joints and eliminating the sensation of actuator mass swinging on the finger. All transmissions remain on the hand, avoiding the resistance, hysteresis, and unmodeled dynamics introduced by off-hand routing such as Bowden cables or pneumatic hoses. The N2D glove weighs 562 g, with a detailed breakdown provided in Table II; the battery is excluded, as it is off-hand. Nearly half of the total mass comes from PLA components, suggesting that reduced infill, structural redesign, and lighter materials could substantially decrease weight. The other major contribution comes from the gimbal motors, which is a notable design constraint. Future advances in gimbal motor miniaturization will also lower overall system mass. Fig. 2: Deconstructed view of the N2D Haptic Glove showing finger linkage joint layout and its correspondence to hand anatomy. TABLE II: Weight breakdown of the N2D Haptic Glove                    

> Qty Component Unit Weight (g) Total (g)
> 6Gimbal Motor 39.5 237 6Motor Driver 4.5 27 10 Encoder 110 1Main PCB 14 14 —PLA & COTS parts 274 274
> Total Weight: 562

B. Electromechanical Architecture 

Fig. 3 summarizes the electromechanical architecture and distributed control enabling torque-transparent capstan-drive actuation in the N2D Haptic Glove. GB2208 gimbal motors were selected for their compact form factor and high-torque, low-speed output without planetary gearing. Six motors are powered by DRV8313 three-phase drivers from a 12 V sup-ply, each paired with an AS5048B 14-bit absolute magnetic encoder for rotor angle feedback. Four additional AS5048B encoders measure the passive abduction–adduction joints. Each motor–encoder pair interfaces with a Teensy 4.1 microcontroller running field-oriented control in torque mode at 1 kHz , while higher-level torque commands are transmitted from the Glove PC at 10 Hz over a serial connection. On the Glove PC, a calibration script generates a user-specific profile of finger link lengths and 6-DOF finger poses. The main control script loads this profile and publishes hand state through a ROS node. An external VIVE Tracker 3.0 provides absolute wrist pose, which is fused with fingertip pose estimates. A corresponding ROS node on the robot side receives these poses and commands the robot arm and 

Fig. 3: System architecture of the N2D Haptic Glove. The Glove PC computes finger poses from encoder data and sends joint commands to the Simulation/Robot PC via ROS. Sensed interaction forces are returned and mapped to motor commands. hand. Measured interaction forces are returned through ROS and mapped to torque commands for the glove, closing the bilateral control loop. 

C. Kinematic Modeling 

Each finger’s kinematic model computes fingertip pose and force relative to its base joint. These are transformed into a unified hand frame, then into the world frame using the es-timated hand pose, localizing each digit in the environment. The device is modeled as a set of modular finger linkage subsystems mounted to a common base (Fig. 4). Each link is treated as a rigid body with orientation R ∈ SO (3) and position p ∈ R3, and transformations between bodies are represented using homogeneous transforms: 

T ji =

 R ji p ji

01×3 1



(1) which represents the pose of coordinate frame i expressed in coordinate frame j.We define a canonical base frame for the device {base }

with fixed origin set at the position-tracker’s origin and orien-tation. Each digit, f ∈ { T,I,M } (Thumb, Index, Middle) has a constant finger base coordinate frame Tbase T,base , Tbase I,base , Tbase M,base 

described in the position-tracker origin. For non-thumb fingers ( f = I, M), the kinematics of the linkages from the finger’s base f , base to the tip can be described using three revolute joints q f ,0, q f ,1, q f ,2 and link lengths a f ,0, a f ,1, a f ,2, a f ,3. The distal tip pose {tip } de-Fig. 4: Kinematic analysis of a finger linkage. (Top) Single finger linkage with three DOFs defined by q0, q1, q2 (with q3being a driven joint by q1 and q2) is shown. (Bottom) Finger linkages on the glove body show the overall coordinate frames with extra passive DOF for thumb opposition. scribed in the base frame {base } is 

T f ,base f ,tip (q f , a f , l f , p f ) = T f ,base f ,0 T f ,0  

> f,1

T f ,1  

> f,2

T f ,2  

> f,3

T f ,3  

> f,tip

=

Ry(q f ,0) 03×1

01×3 1

  Rz(q f ,1) p0 

> f,1

01×3 1

Rz(q f ,2) tr x(a f ,1 + l5)

01×3 1

  Rz(q f ,3) tr x(a f ,2)

01×3 1

I3×3 tr x(a f ,3)

01×3 1



(2) 

where Rz is the 3 × 3 rotation matrix about z and tr x(a(·)) = [a(·), 0, 0]⊤. Angle q f ,3 is driven by q f ,1 and q f ,2. We solve 

q f ,3 via the cosine law by first computing the diagonal CD ,then the internal angles ∠ADC and ∠BDC , and finally taking their difference. Such that 

CD = l4 =

q

a22 + l25 + 2a2l5 cos q f ,2 (3) 

∠ADC = arccos l22 + l24 − l23

2l2 l4

!

(4) 

∠BDC = arccos l24 + a2  

> f,2

− l25

2l4 a f ,2

!

(5) 

q f ,3 = ∠ADC − ∠BDC (6) 

The resultant position of each finger in its base frame is 

x f ,base f ,tip = c0(( p f ,0 

> f,1

)x + a1c123 + a f ,2c12 + ( a f ,1 + l f ,5)c1) (7) 

y f ,base f ,tip = ( p f ,0 

> f,1

)y + l f ,2s123 + a f ,3s12 + ( a f ,1 + l f ,5)s1 (8) 

z f ,base f ,tip = −s0(( p f ,0 

> f,1

)x + a1c123 + a f ,2c12 + ( a f ,1 + l f ,5)c1)

(9) with shorthand notation used, e.g., s 0 = sin (q f ,0) and c 123 =

cos (q f ,1 + q f ,2 + q f ,3).The thumb ( f = T) has an additional passive joint provid-ing affordance for opposition, with the modified transforma-tion: 

TT,base T,tip (qT , aT ) = TT,base T,op TT,op T,0 TT,0 

> T,1

TT,1 

> T,2

TT,2 

> T,3

TT,3 

> T,tip

(10) where TT,base T,op =

Rz(qT,op ) pbase op )

01×3 1



describes the additional link transform, and then TT,op T,0 =

Ry(qT,0) 03×1

01×3 1



followed by the same transforms. Given the pose of the glove in the world Twbase , as measured by an optical tracker, we can derive the pose (position and orientation) of each finger in the world via 

Twf ,tip = Twbase Tbase f ,base T f ,base f ,tip =

Rwf ,tip pwf ,tip 

01×3 1



(11) The finger tip positions ( f = {T, I, M}) in the world are thus 

pwf ,tip = xwf ,tip ywf ,tip zwf ,tip 

⊤ (12) 

D. Multi-digit Haptic Rendering 

Directional haptics are rendered by mapping Cartesian forces in the world frame, fwf ∈ R3, to joint torques τ f ∈ R2

via Jacobian transpose: 

τ f = Jwf (q f )⊤fwf (13) where Jwf (q f ) = 

 ∂ pwf    

> ∂qf,1

, ∂ pwf   

> ∂qf,2



∈ R3×2 is the Jacobian matrix of the position vector pwf w.r.t the joint angles q f . This formu-lation assumes quasi-static operation, neglecting link inertia and friction, as force transmission is geometry-dominated. In teleoperation experiments, contact forces are measured directly as 3D Cartesian vectors in the world frame and applied without additional frame transformations. Only trans-lational force components are rendered; moments and wrench relocation are not considered Because each finger has only two active DOF, the set of achievable Cartesian forces lies in the column space of Jwf (q f ), whose columns correspond to the instantaneous Cartesian force directions generated by the two motors and thus define a configuration-dependent 2D subspace of R3.Any desired force can be decomposed as 

fwf = fw,pro j f + fw,⊥ 

> f

(14) where fw,pro j f ∈ col (Jwf ) and fw,⊥ 

> f

∈ null (Jwf ⊤). Since 

Jwf ⊤fw,⊥ 

> f

= 0, this Jacobian transpose mapping eliminates the component out-of the plane, and the device implicitly renders the desired force onto its achievable 2D force subspace. The uncontrolled direction, corresponding to finger adduction and abduction, is therefore not reflected. 0 10 20 30        

> Step
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Force (N)  Z-Axis Force Tracking
> 010 20 30
> Step
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> Force (N)  X-Axis Force Tracking
> 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
> X Force (N)
> 0.6
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Z Force (N)
> Measured Force (X vs Z)
> Commanded Path
> Measured Force

Fig. 5: Experimental force tracking results. (Left) Force calibration setup showing the world coordinate frame (xworld , zworld )

and tip coordinate frame (xtip , ytip ). (Center) Individual commanded and measured force components along the x and z axes. (Right) Measured forces plotted in the x–z plane compared to the commanded circular trajectory. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

We conducted benchtop validation experiments along with a teleoperation user study to provide both quantitative and qualitative assessments of the N2D Haptic Glove, demon-strating its performance in controlled force rendering tasks as well as its effectiveness in real-world robotic teleoperation. 

A. Validation Experiments 1) Planar Joint Actuation Experiment: A voltage–torque mapping for each joint is identified through a quasi-static di-rectional calibration procedure. Motor torque is proportional to current; at the low velocities considered, back-EMF is negligible, allowing current to be approximated from applied voltage and internal motor resistance via Ohm’s law. Planar fingertip forces are measured using an ATI Axia80 3-DOF force sensor. The finger linkage system was mounted at a chosen configuration where the finger tip coordinate axes coincides with the force sensor’s measurement axes, as shown in Fig. 5. All commanded and measured forces are expressed in the world frame defined in the setup. Joint torque is modeled as a voltage-dependent mapping 

τ f =

ζ1 fpoly (v f ,1, k f ,1) 00 ζ2 fpoly (v f ,2, k f ,2)



(15) where ζi are capstan gear ratios and k f ,i are polynomial co-efficients. Using voltage sweeps v f and measured Cartesian forces fwf , the coefficients are solved in closed form via least squares using the Jacobian transpose relation in Eq. 13. Each finger is calibrated once. To evaluate tracking accuracy, circular planar force trajec-tories were commanded. Figure 5 shows the commanded and measured force components fx and fz per step. Force tracking performance is summarized by the root-mean-squared errors (RMSE): RMSE x = 0.032 N, RMSE z =

0.014 N, RMSE |e| = 0.034 N, and RMSE θ = 2.81 ◦. The commanded and measured force trajectories show close agreement in both magnitude and direction. The fingertip Jacobian Jwf is well-conditioned with 

κ(Jwf ) ≈ 2.93, indicating moderate directional sensitivity in torque-to-force transmission. The Jacobian remains full rank across all evaluated configurations, confirming that indepen-dent force components can be generated along both planar axes. These results demonstrate that forces can be rendered accurately throughout the x–z plane with minimal distortion. Residual error is attributed to unmodeled nonlinearities in the voltage-torque mapping, particularly along directions where both motor axes contribute near-equally and com-manded voltages are low, entering dead-zone regions. Cap-stan friction and motor saturation effects further contribute to magnitude and angular discrepancies. 

2) Directional Force Generation Capability Analysis: 

To ensure the N2D Haptic Glove remains effective across different hand configurations, its ability to generate planar forces throughout the workspace must be evaluated. The workspace is defined here as the range of finger configura-tions achievable while wearing the glove. To characterize pla-nar directional force capability across these configurations, we compute the manipulability index. 

w(qf) = 

q

det (Jwf,xz (qf)Jwf,xz ⊤(qf)) = det  Jwf,xz (qf) (16) for all achievable configurations, where Jwf,xz (qf) ∈ R2×2

is the planar fingertip Jacobian obtained from the x-z rows of the full Jacobian. The value w is a scalar metric that quantifies the system’s ability to generate planar forces in multiple directions at a given configuration. Higher values indicate more uniform and effective directional force gener-ation, whereas w(q f ) → 0 indicates proximity to a singular configuration and reduced force controllability. Fig. 6 shows the resulting manipulability color maps for two participants representing small and large hand sizes (15.4 cm and 20.5 cm hand length, respectively, within reported adult ranges [22]). To obtain the configuration space, partic-ipants performed maximal flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction movements. After normalization, 58% of sampled configurations have manipulability values at or above 0.82. The configuration Small Hand  Large Hand     

> Manipulability Index ( 𝝎 )×𝟏 𝟎 −𝟑
> Thumb
> Index
> Middle
> 7.93
> 11.92
> 11.89
> 2.77
> 7.58
> 7.73
> X (mm) Z (mm)
> Y (mm)
> Y (mm)
> X (mm) Z (mm)

Fig. 6: Workspace range of motion for a small and large hand (scatter points). The overlaid manipulability colormap indicates configuration-dependent directional force capabil-ity, showing well-conditioned force generation throughout typical operating regions. used in the planar joint actuation experiment also has normalized manipulability 0.82, indicating that over half of the sampled workspace is at least as well conditioned for planar force generation as the experimentally validated configuration. This result suggests that the glove can provide effective directional force output across a broad range of reachable finger postures, rather than only near a small set of favorable configurations for different hand sizes. 

3) Haptic Teleoperation with Franka Arm Experiment: 

Although seemingly simple, pushing is fundamental to manipulation, particularly for probing and confirming dis-crete contacts such as button presses. In teleoperated set-tings—e.g., operating control panels or medical equip-ment—pushing becomes difficult without appropriate haptic feedback. Vision alone cannot reliably confirm contact when visual motion is minimal, and 1D force feedback fails to capture off-axis interactions. Thus, accurate multi-DOF force feedback is essential for natural execution of pushing tasks. To evaluate the glove’s ability to render realistic forces during pushing, we conducted a user study simulating tele-operated button pressing. Participants teleoperated a Franka Emika Panda robot equipped with an RH56DFTP dexterous hand with tactile sensing array to press on a digital scale toward a target weight while wearing the N2D Haptic Glove. Three feedback conditions were tested: no haptics, 1D haptics (one motor disabled to emulate a 1-DOF resistive tendon glove), and full 2D haptics. In all conditions, participants received visual feedback via a live video stream of the robot hand and scale to limit depth cues. The scale display was hidden to replicate typical VR and teleoperation constraints. All participants pressed the scale to a target weight under all three haptic modes across four conditions defined by finger contact orientation and target weight, with group order quasi-randomized. Contact orientation included axial probing (finger tip contact) and transverse probing (finger pad contact), while target weight was set to 50 g or 100 g, 

Fig. 7: Franka Arm and Inspire Hand scale pressing task setup. Participants teleoperated the robot to press a digital scale toward a target weight under three feedback conditions: no haptics, 1D haptics, and 2D haptics. yielding four condition combinations. Before each condition and haptic mode, participants com-pleted a 2-minute training period with the corresponding feedback active to calibrate visual and force perception. During training, the scale display was visible. Afterward, participants performed five trials in which they pressed the scale—by lowering their hand—to what they perceived as the target weight. The true scale reading was recorded for each trial by the study organizer. Performance was evaluated by the absolute error between the true scale weight and the target weight. Furthermore, users completed two NASA-TLX [23] surveys afterwards, one for each finger contact location experience. A total of 16 participants completed the user study, with Figure 8 showing the absolute error boxplot distribution and Table III presenting the statistical analysis of all four groups across haptic feedback modes. To evaluate whether haptic feedback modality, target weight, and finger contact location statistically affect abso-lute error from target, a linear mixed-effects model (LMM) was used. Absolute error was treated as the dependent vari-able, with haptic modality, target weight, and contact location as fixed effects. Additionally, participant was included as a random intercept to account for participant baseline differ-ences and the experiment’s repeated-measures structure. An LMM was chosen, as opposed to Friedman or Kruskal-Wallis with post-hoc tests, due to non-independence of repeated measurements from a participant across tri-als and groups. Therefore, an LMM allows all individual trial data to be retained while appropriately accounting for within-participant correlations, maintaining statistical power. Planned pairwise contrasts between haptic feedback modal-ities were performed using Holm-corrected p-values to con-trol for multiple comparisons, with the significance level chosen as α = 0.05. TABLE III: Per-trial absolute error statistics across target weight and contact conditions ( n = 16 participants). Median absolute errors (g) per condition decreases with more degrees of haptic feedback for all groups. p-values are from planned pairwise contrasts of a linear mixed-effects model with Holm correction. Negative estimated differences indicate reduced error relative to the comparison modality. From these results, 2D haptic feedback generally yields significantly less error. Group Mode Median Abs Err (Q1–Q3) (g) p (vs Vis) Est. Diff vs Vis (g) p (vs 1D) Est. Diff vs 1D (g) Axial 50g Visual 37.68 (20.20-63.00) – – 2.53 × 10 −4 +39.40 1D 30.80 (12.28-50.00) 2.53 × 10 −4 −39 .40 – –2D 24.99 (11.25-38.23) 2.56 × 10 −6 −50 .60 0.276 −11 .20 Axial 100g Visual 50.25 (29.88-93.91) – – 0.032 +26.18 1D 34.73 (10.00-87.45) 0.032 −26 .18 – –2D 21.20 (9.20-43.63) 1.43 × 10 −5 −55 .27 0.032 −29 .09 Transverse 50g Visual 42.52 (25.00-88.25) – – 4.09 × 10 −4 +36.43 1D 27.65 (14.53-50.00) 4.09 × 10 −4 −36 .43 – –2D 27.85 (13.24-47.43) 5.07 × 10 −4 −34 .94 0.876 +1.49 Transverse 100g Visual 89.30 (57.00-179.08) – – 0.0315 +49.02 1D 61.00 (27.10-116.59) 0.0315 −49 .02 – –2D 46.52 (15.88-113.25) 0.0315 −49 .40 0.985 −0.37 

Fig. 8: Boxplots of absolute error (g) for target weights of 50 g and 100 g. In axial probing, median error decreases progressively from visual-only to 1D to 2D feedback. In transverse probing, both 1D and 2D feedback reduce error compared to visual-only, with no significant difference be-tween 1D and 2D. In axial probing conditions, median absolute error de-creased progressively from no haptic to 1D to 2D feedback, indicating improved accuracy with higher-fidelity force ren-dering. The LMM results corroborate this trend: at the 100 g target, 2D feedback significantly outperformed both 1D and no-feedback conditions, with large estimated differences favoring 2D. These findings demonstrate that 2D haptic feed-back significantly enhances force regulation and precision during axial interactions, where single-DOF resistive tendon feedback is insufficient. At the 50 g target, the reduction in median error from 1D to 2D was not statistically significant, likely because 50 g approaches the lower bound of the motors’ effective operat-ing range. Notably, 2D feedback produced more consistent performance, reflected by a smaller interquartile range of absolute error compared to visual-only and 1D conditions. In transverse probing conditions, participants performed significantly better with either 1D or 2D haptic feedback compared to no feedback. However, no statistically signifi-cant difference was observed between the 1D and 2D modes, with an estimated effect size near zero. These results suggest that the presence of directional force feedback—regardless of 

Fig. 9: Individual NASA TLX survey results for axial prob-ing and transverse probing, demonstrating multi-directional haptic feedback significantly reduces cognitive load while improving overall performance for participants. dimensionality—is sufficient to improve accuracy and reduce error during transverse interactions, while 2D feedback offers no measurable advantage over 1D. This outcome is expected, as transverse probing forces can be effectively rendered using conventional 1-DOF resistive tendon-based gloves. Subjective feedback further reinforces the value of the N2D Haptic glove over existing 1D resistive tendon gloves. NASA TLX ratings indicate that when receiving 2D haptic feedback for both axial and transverse probing, participants expressed that their perceived performance increased with more control and clearer feedback, while their mental de-mand decreased, as seen in Figure 9. Moreover, responses indicate total perceived physical demand only decreased marginally with 2D haptic feedback due to the excessive weight of the glove present for all three feedback modes, as expressed by multiple participants. Taken together, results from our study show that planar force feedback enhances both objective force regulation and subjective user experience in teleoperated tasks. V. D ISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 

Directional fingertip haptics are essential for realistic phys-ical interaction in teleoperation. We presented the design, analysis, validation, and user study of the N2D Haptic Glove to evaluate the impact of multi-directional feedback. Results show that 2D haptic feedback significantly im-proves precision in axial probing and pressing tasks by re-ducing force error and increasing consistency. This highlights the feasibility of implementing the N2D haptic glove for VR and teleoperation axial probing tasks, such as pushing small buttons or searching a confined medical environment for surgical tools with finger tips. Although effectiveness of the N2D Haptic Glove for transverse probing is comparable to 1D haptic feedback, the collective results suggest the glove will still enable more precise manipulation than existing 1D haptic gloves for tasks in between full axial and full transverse probing directions. Additionally, N2D Haptic Glove’s 2-DOF force feedback improves user experience and confidence, further proving its value for teleoperation and VR simulation tasks. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that multi-directional force feedback allows users to regulate contact forces more accurately and consistently across a broader range of tasks. The N2D Haptic Glove thus provides a foundation for next-generation wearable haptic interfaces that support more natural and effective human–robot interaction. Although the work demonstrates accurate multi-directional force rendering, several limitations remain. The current de-sign actuates three fingers and weighs 562 g; scaling to all five would increase total mass to approximately 780 g. At the current weight, the glove can become fatiguing during extended use, despite the GB2208 being one of the best torque-to-weight motors on the market. Another limiting factor is the deadzone at the lower bound of the motor’s operating voltage, which limits feedback for very precise, low-force tasks. Ongoing advances in drone motor technology are rapidly improving motor size and efficiency, which is likely to reduce these constraints and offer a more effective N3D option in the future. In conclusion, the N2D Haptic Glove demonstrates that multi-directional haptics are both feasible and beneficial for contact-rich tasks, particularly those involving axial probing. Our user study highlights its advantage in fingertip button pressing, but similar benefits extend to tasks categorized as peg-in-hole insertion, where sensing lateral misalignment forces can substantially improve guidance and task comple-tion time. More broadly, the N2D Haptic Glove may be integrated with immersive simulation environments [24, 25], used in medical teleoperation systems [26], and incorporated into imitation learning pipelines [27]. These applications demonstrate the value of multi-directional fingertip feedback as a missing modality in current wearable haptic systems. REFERENCES [1] C. Cuan, A. Okamura, and M. Khansari, “Leveraging haptic feedback to improve data quality and quantity for deep imitation learning models,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 984–991, 2024. [2] X. Cheng, J. Li, S. Yang, G. Yang, and X. Wang, “Open-TeleVision: Teleoperation with immersive active visual feedback,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2024. [3] V. Nitsch and B. F¨ arber, “A meta-analysis of the effects of haptic interfaces on task performance with teleoperation systems,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 387–398, 2013. [4] S. Baik, S. Park, and J. Park, “Haptic glove using tendon-driven soft robotic mechanism,” Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology ,vol. 8, p. 541105, 2020. [5] H. Zhang, S. Hu, Z. Yuan, and H. Xu, “DOGlove: Dexterous manipu-lation with a low-cost open-source haptic force feedback glove,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07730 , 2025. [6] SenseGlove B.V., “SenseGlove R1.” https://www. senseglove.com/project-rembrandt/ , 2025. Accessed: 2025. [7] D. Trinitatova and D. Tsetserukou, “FiDTouch: A 3D wearable haptic display for the finger pad,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07661 , 2025. [8] HaptX Inc., “HaptX gloves G1.” https://haptx.com/ gloves-g1/ , 2025. Accessed: 2025. [9] S. B. Schorr, Z. F. Quek, I. Nisky, W. R. Provancher, and A. M. Oka-mura, “Tactor-induced skin stretch as a sensory substitution method in teleoperated palpation,” IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems , vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 714–726, 2015. [10] L. T. Gwilliam, A. J. Doxon, and W. R. Provancher, “Haptic matching of directional force and skin stretch feedback cues,” in 2013 World Haptics Conference (WHC) , pp. 19–24, IEEE, 2013. [11] Z. F. Quek, S. B. Schorr, I. Nisky, W. R. Provancher, and A. M. Okamura, “Sensory substitution and augmentation using 3-degree-of-freedom skin deformation feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics ,vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 209–221, 2015. [12] J. Min, S. Jang, S. Lee, and Y. Cha, “Ultralight soft wearable haptic interface with shear-normal-vibration feedback,” Advanced Intelligent Systems , p. 2500374, 2025. [13] Y. Ma, T. Xie, P. Zhang, H. Kim, and S. Je, “Airpush: A pneumatic wearable haptic device providing multi-dimensional force feedback on a fingertip,” in Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1–13, 2024. [14] T. P. Trzpit, G. Reardon, A. Shilati, E. M. Gerber, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “NURing: A tendon-driven wearable ring for on-demand kinesthetic haptic feedback,” in IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC) , 2025. [15] H. Kim, H. Yi, H. Lee, and W. Lee, “HapCube: A wearable tactile device to provide tangential and normal pseudo-force feedback on a fingertip,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1–13, 2018. [16] C. Pacchierotti, D. Prattichizzo, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Cutaneous feedback of fingertip deformation and vibration for palpation in robotic surgery,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 278–287, 2016. [17] V. Shen, T. Rae-Grant, J. Mullenbach, C. Harrison, and C. Shultz, “Fluid reality: High-resolution, untethered haptic gloves using elec-troosmotic pump arrays,” in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Tech. , pp. 1–20, 2023. [18] X. Gu, Y. Zhang, W. Sun, Y. Bian, D. Zhou, and P. O. Kristensson, “Dexmo: An inexpensive and lightweight mechanical exoskeleton for motion capture and force feedback in vr,” in Proc. of the 2016 CHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1991–1995, 2016. [19] J. Qi, F. Gao, G. Sun, J. C. Yeo, and C. T. Lim, “HaptGlove— untethered pneumatic glove for multimode haptic feedback in reality– virtuality continuum,” Advanced Science , vol. 10, no. 25, p. 2301044, 2023. [20] K. S. Fok and S. M. Chou, “Development of a finger biomechanical model and its considerations,” Journal of biomechanics , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 701–713, 2010. [21] A. Lemos, L. Rodrigues da Silva, B. Nagy, P. Barroso, and C. Vimieiro, “Biomechanical hand model: Modeling and simulating the lateral pinch movement,” Experimental Mechanics , vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 1557–1578, 2024. [22] C. C. Gordon, T. Churchill, C. E. Clauser, B. Bradtmiller, J. T. McConville, I. Tebbetts, and R. A. Walker, “1988 anthropometric survey of u.s. army personnel: Summary statistics (interim report),” Tech. Rep. ADA209600, U.S. Army Natick Research, Development and Engineering Center, Natick, MA, 1989. [23] S. G. Hart, “Nasa-task load index (nasa-tlx); 20 years later,” in 

Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting , vol. 50, pp. 904–908, Sage publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2006. [24] A. Gani, O. Pickering, C. Ellis, O. Sabri, and P. Pucher, “Impact of haptic feedback on surgical training outcomes: a randomised controlled trial of haptic versus non-haptic immersive virtual reality training,” Annals of Medicine and Surgery , vol. 83, p. 104734, 2022. [25] K. Li, S. M. Wagh, N. Sharma, S. Bhadani, W. Chen, C. Liu, and P. Kormushev, “Haptic-ACT: Bridging human intuition with compliant robotic manipulation via immersive VR,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11925 , 2024. [26] X. Guo, F. McFall, P. Jiang, J. Liu, N. Lepora, and D. Zhang, “A lightweight and affordable wearable haptic controller for robot-assisted microsurgery,” Sensors , vol. 24, no. 9, p. 2676, 2024. [27] K. Li, D. Chappell, and N. Rojas, “Immersive demonstrations are the key to imitation learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 5071–5077, 2023.