DESIGNING THE FUTURE OF USER FEEDBACK FOR GENERATIVE
AI
Alisa Frik*1,2,
Julia Bernd†1,2, Amitis Karami‡3, and
Mohammad Tahaei§1,3
1International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA
2University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
3eBay Inc., San Jose, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
Post-deployment feedback from users can be a cost-effective, scalable, and representative means to
monitor and improve generative AI systems and features. When implemented effectively, giving such
feedback can increase users’ engagement with and trust in GenAI systems. Government regulations
and industry guidelines call for post-deployment user engagement, but there is little guidance on
designing mechanisms that are usable for consumers and provide actionable input for product teams.
We conducted a multi-phase study as a collaboration between academic researchers and eBay. Our
benchmark evaluation of current industry approaches identified common issues including lack of
discoverability, unclear terminology, and inattention to user value. Based on these findings, we
developed best-practice recommendations and designed and tested a prototype feedback-collection
tool. The tool aimed to provide users with an efficient, flexible, and positive feedback-giving
experience, and provide product teams with rich data on performance and potential problems in a
usable format.
Keywords Generative AI · Responsible AI · User Feedback · Interface Design · Heuristic Evaluation
1
Introduction
Generative AI (GenAI) systems, especially Large Language Models (LLMs), have rapidly moved from research settings
into everyday digital products Sun et al. [2024]. GenAI capabilities are now embedded in conversational assistants
and other interfaces that support content creation and information work OpenAI [2022], Tahaei et al. [2023a]. Human
feedback is central to how these systems are built and improved Hashmati et al. [2025]: it enters through data creation
and annotation, supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning, and post-deployment interaction and evaluation
National Institute of Standards and Technology [2023], of Standards and Technology [2024]. In deployed products,
feedback is therefore not a peripheral interface feature; it is part of how providers monitor system behavior and
iteratively refine model-enabled systems National Institute of Standards and Technology [2023], of Standards and
Technology [2024]. Figure 1 shows some examples of feedback forms for GenAI products and features.
User feedback, specifically (as opposed to feedback from trained annotators) offers cost-effective, scaled, contextual,
and potentially more representative signal for refining model outputs. Moreover, ability to provide intentional feedback
may increase users’ engagement and trust, explicitly involving them in system improvements and fine-tuning of models,
and it can boost a company’s reputation and support efforts in addressing safety and ethical challenges.
Recent events provide evidence of why these feedback loops matter. In 2025, OpenAI reported that a GPT-4o update
had made ChatGPT overly sycophantic—excessively obedient and insincerely flattering—and identified an additional
reward signal informed in part by thumbs-up and thumbs-down feedback as one of the contributing factors OpenAI
∗afrik@icsi.berkeley.edu
†jbernd@icsi.berkeley.edu
‡akarami@ebay.com
§mtahaei@ebay.com
arXiv:2610.02631v1  [cs.AI]  2 Oct 2026


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 1: Example feedback forms for eBay’s AI Description Generator, Claude, Google Search’s AI Overview, and
Amazon’s Rufus. Screenshots are from March 2025.
[2025a]. This illustrates that post-deployment feedback can shape model behavior, not merely customer support or
surface-level user experience. Moreover, user feedback helps companies fine-tune models in a cost-effective manner
by supplementing limited internal testing capacity with crowdsourced model-improvement signals. Major providers
explicitly position feedback as part of improvement and monitoring OpenAI [2025b], Google [2025], Microsoft [2025].
The policy context makes the need for effective monitoring especially salient. NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework
and its Generative AI Profile frame AI risk management across the AI life cycle National Institute of Standards and
Technology [2023], of Standards and Technology [2024], National Institute of Standards and Technology [2026]. The
EU AI Act also requires post-market monitoring systems for high-risk AI systems that actively and systematically
collect, document, and analyze relevant data throughout the system’s lifetime European Parliament and Council of the
European Union [2024]. User feedback mechanisms could help operationalize post-deployment monitoring policy
requirements for both high-risk and lower-risk systems.
However, while existing regulations and standards articulate governance objectives, concrete guidance about how to
collect and process user feedback about GenAI features is currently limited in both industry and academia. There are no
official standards or empirically grounded design frameworks for user feedback mechanisms that explain how feedback
tools should be made discoverable, legible, privacy-aware, and actionable for both users and organizations. Nor is there
much understanding of what users’ actual experience with or perceptions of those feedback mechanisms are, or what
kinds of feedback they would like to provide to companies in the first place. The lack of such standards and guidance
limits companies’ use of user feedback for fine-tuning of the models, which in turn hinders efforts to improve 1) model
performance, 2) adherence to responsible AI practices, policies, and regulations (e.g., the AI EU Act), and 3) user
experience, trust, and satisfaction with the AI-powered products. This makes end-user feedback tools an important but
understudied layer of GenAI governance.
Thus, the overarching objective for this research is to identify best practices for designing and implementing usable
and useful user feedback tools for digital products that use GenAI features. We aim to answer the following research
questions:
• RQ1: How do different products with GenAI features currently collect feedback from users about those
features?
• RQ2: What do researchers, product team stakeholders, and users view as best practices and usability issues
for existing and proposed user-feedback collection mechanisms?
2


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
To answer these questions, we conducted a multi-phase study that benchmarked current industry approaches, assessed
them through usability-oriented inspection and heuristic evaluation, and iteratively developed and refined a prototype
with input from industry stakeholders and users. This work was conducted in collaboration with eBay, a large e-
commerce platformthat makes extensive use of GenAI and related user feedback mechanisms. This collaboration
grounds our contributions in an industry context and helps ensure that the resulting design guidelines are applicable and
usable in real-world settings. Across these phases, we identified recurring issues in discoverability, clarity, consistency,
transparency, and perceived user value, and translated those findings into an empirically grounded set of design
recommendations for user feedback tools in GenAI systems.
The contributions of this research include:
• A taxonomy of the current landscape of existing approaches to collecting user feedback about GenAI features
used by eBay and other companies;
• An assessment of existing approaches via heuristic evaluation;
• A user-tested prototype feedback tool;
• Design guidelines and best practices for feedback tools for GenAI-powered features.
2
Related Work
2.1
User Feedback Mechanisms for Generative AI
With the advent of ChatGPT and the proliferation of Generative AI (GenAI), the need to carefully design how systems
communicate with and learn from users has intensified Weisz et al. [2023], Liao and Vaughan [2023], Zamfirescu-Pereira
et al. [2023], Casper et al. [2023]. Within HCI, it is well established that interfaces fundamentally mediate how users
understand and interact with digital systems Norman [1986, 2013]. Thus, user feedback mechanisms play an important
role in closing the loop between AI outputs, user experience, and model improvement, making AI systems smarter,
safer, and more user-centered. Kirk et al. [2023] surveyed 95 papers to summarize past and present approaches for using
human feedback in machine learning for training and fine-tuning LLMs (including explicit comparisons of outputs by
human raters, fine-grained feedback, edits, implicit feedback, and feedback collected from social media and forums),
and discussed suggestions for future improvements to those approaches.
While extensive machine learning research focuses on how human feedback can be used to train and fine-tune foundation
models (e.g., via Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), where the model generates several outputs
and human raters vote on the preferred options based on specified criteria) [e.g., Lin et al., 2020, Griffith et al., 2013,
Retzlaff et al., 2024, Ziegler et al., 2019, Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022], there remains a critical gap regarding
effective design patterns that can be used to capture this data. Moreover, relying on binary votes, as is typical for RLHF,
limits understanding of what aspects of the output influenced a rater’s preference Wu et al. [2023]—though this may
also be an issue even with more fine-grained feedback options Collins et al. [2025]. How that feedback mechanism is
designed is critical for its success, as prior research demonstrates that interface design and choice architecture directly
impact user choices, significantly altering user perceptions and behaviors Thaler and Sunstein [2008], Thaler et al.
[2013], Münscher et al. [2016], Johnson et al. [2012]. Therefore, the feedback interface is not a neutral conduit; it is a
critical socio-technical instrument that shapes the very systems that rely upon it to function and improve.
Moreover, prior research demonstrates that it is beneficial to “keep humans in the loop” to ensure adequate levels
of control over ethical violations in AI systems Cranor [2008] as well as adherence to ethical AI guidelines Chen
et al. [2023]. Additionally, preserving agency is an important value for humans when interacting with computing
systems Sundar and Marathe [2010], Huang and Cao [2023], Tene and Polonetsky [2012]. Concerns about the
“alignment problem” in AI (i.e. concerns that AI will take away control from humans and will pose existential threats to
humanity) also illustrate how important agency and a sense of control are for human users of AI Yudkowsky [2016],
Gabriel [2020], Ghazavi and Gabriel. Thus, we hypothesize that well-designed feedback tools could support a sense of
agency, control, and trust among users of AI-powered features and services.
2.2
Existing AI Governance Guidelines about Feedback for GenAI Systems
Scrutiny of AI systems and structured efforts to mitigate risks posed by AI are increasing, with a growing number
of governance and regulatory frameworks for AI emerging around the world [see overview in Radu, 2021, Ulnicane
et al., 2022]. The most prominent examples include the Chinese government’s AI regulations [see overview in Franks
et al., 2024] and the European Union’s Artificial Intelligence Act European Commission [2021], which call for greater
transparency and impose evaluations of whether AI systems are trustworthy and responsibly developed. Frameworks
3


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
for multilateral governance of AI have also emerged to address advanced AI systems, including the G7 Code of
Conduct Commission [2023a], the Guiding Principles for Advanced AI System Commission [2023b], and the Bletchley
Declaration Summit [2025].
To address the growing need to manage responsibility for AI safety and trustworthiness, businesses, government,
non-profits, and civil society organizations have started developing various guidelines, taxonomies, and frameworks for
evaluating and addressing ethical risks posed by AI. Notable examples include UNESCO’s Ethics of AI UNESCO,
Microsoft’s Guidelines for Human-AI Interaction Amershi et al. [2019], Google’s People + AI Guidebook for designing
human-centered AI products Google, NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework National Institute of Standards and
Technology [2023], and the accompanying Generative AI (GenAI) Profile of Standards and Technology [2024], which
provides specific risk management guidance to address GenAI models and uses. UC Berkeley has also published an
AI Risk-Management Standards Profile for General Purposes AI Systems (GPAIS) and Foundation Models Barrett
et al. [2023]. While these guidelines recommend regular audits and systematic reviews and risk assessments of the
models, they don’t provide recommendations on how AI models or AI-enabled products and services could continuously
monitor the performance of the models by leveraging users’ direct feedback to detect issues. Such feedback allows
for more timely and scaled signals, compared to risk assessments, audits, and reviews, which cannot be done on a
continuous basis due to the complexity, cost, and time-intensiveness of the processes.
Some of the existing frameworks and industry guidelines, such as Microsoft’s Guidelines for Human-AI Interaction,
explicitly call for systems to encourage granular feedback during and after the interaction (e.g., Guideline 15) Amershi
et al. [2019]. However, these guidelines are rather vague and do not provide operational guidelines about how to
emplement effective feedback mechanisms. For example, they suggest “consider[ing] how to convey to the user that
the feedback was received” or warn that it may be “unclear to the user that they can provide feedback to the AI
system” or “unclear to the user what the feedback options mean”, but do not provide actual design recommendations
about what systems’ signals, entry points, or feedback options convey such information to users clearly, and which
approaches, in contrast, are ineffective or confusing. Similarly, one of the principles in Google’s People + AI Guidebook
for designing human-centered AI products Google recommends adapting AI using feedback to maximize product
benefits and minimize potential harms to users. This Guidebook also emphasizes the importance of transparency about
privacy-related implications of providing feedback, including what information is being collected, when, what it is for,
and how it can it benefit the user. While the Guidebook suggests designing structured multi-modal feedback collection
mechanisms, it offers limited guidance about how to actually design feedback interfaces, with few suggestions about
content.
2.3
User Research about Feedback Mechanisms for GenAI Systems
User-centered research about user feedback mechanisms in GenAI interfaces is scarce. One notable exception is a
critical analysis of survey results about the feedback interface for ChatGPT, which indicates that the current design
encourages simple, frequent, and performance-focused feedback, while actively discouraging collective input and
discussions among users Cooper and Zafiroglu [2025]. Authors recommend exploring whether more participatory
approaches and deliberative processes would better capture ethical and social concerns.
A survey of 1,500 participants from 75 countries assessed their contextual model preferences and structured feedback
regarding value alignment, fluency, factuality, safety, diversity, creativity, and helpfulness of over 8,000 conversations
with 21 LLMs Kirk et al. [2024]. It found that model rankings varied according to to idiosyncratic, contextual, and
group-wise factors, and that average scores concealed model ratings and model preferences among minority groups,
emphasizing the importance of diversity among human raters. Such idiosyncratic differences support the idea of
developing personalized RLHF frameworks to tailor LLM responses to individual user preferences based on their
feedback Li et al. [2024], Zollo et al. [2025], Poddar et al. [2024] or inferred profiling Jiang et al. [2025]. In an
experiment, Xu et al. [2023] collected different types of human feedback (including binary quality measurements,
free-form text feedback, and fine-grained multi-choice reasons for model failure) to compare various methods for
learning from feedback. They found that feedback about particular modules outperforms feedback about the overall
output, and combining multiple modes of feedback results in best learning outcomes. However, neither Kirk et al.
[2024] nor Xu et al. [2023] assessed the usability of the feedback mechanisms themselves.
2.4
Existing gap and our contribution
To summarize, to the best of our knowledge, despite some companies mentioning the value of user feedback in their
guidelines and some key principles [e.g., Amershi et al., 2019, Google], user-centric research evidence about effective
feedback mechanisms for GenAI-enabled systems is scarce. There is currently no standardized framework, approach,
or detailed design guidelines to capture high-quality, output-specific feedback in GenAI interfaces. To reduce this
4


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
gap, we systematically analyzed the current status quo across multiple interfaces, establishing an evidence-driven
baseline, and conducted research with users and designers of generative AI features. This paper contributes concrete
guidelines, an actionable framework, and design recommendations to advance the design of post-deployment feedback
tools, transitioning them from ad-hoc interface elements into robust, human-centered governance mechanisms.
3
Methods
We conducted multi-phase research. To address RQ1, we started from developing a benchmark of existing approaches
for collecting user feedback about GenAI across different sectors. Then we conducted usability inspection of those
approaches, and developed a taxonomy of common design elements and heuristics for evaluating their usability (§3.1).
To address RQ2, we invited eBay stakeholders to provide structured feedback via expert heuristic evaluations, to take
into consideration cross-functional perspectives (§3.2). Based on insights from the usability inspection the heuristic
evaluation, and input from eBay stakeholders, we developed an initial set of guidelines and best practices, which
we used to design an initial prototype of the feedback tool. We then tested the prototype with eBay users (§3.3), to
complement the researchers’ and stakeholders’ perspectives with users’ opinions (RQ2). We used participants’ feedback
to refine the prototype and the guidelines.
3.1
Benchmark and Usability Inspection
Using web and mobile traffic rankings, we identified the most popular digital products, including dedicated GenAI
tools/platforms Capitalist [2024] as well as websites Similarweb [2025a] and apps of Apps [2024], Similarweb
[2025b, 2024] across major sectors and genres (e.g. search, entertainment, social media, news media, communication,
productivity), including e-commerce/shopping services. From those sets, we chose up to 5 products per category that
offered GenAI features in their user interface and met our inclusion criteria, as well as the 7 dedicated GenAI tools
out of the top 10 that met our inclusion criteria, and identified those that had user feedback mechanisms. We also
supplemented with products that weren’t on the most-popular lists to achieve better coverage across categories. When
available, we included both the mobile and web version of the products.
We excluded products that did not have a free version, required a device the researchers did not have (e.g., VR glasses
or a smart TV), required a business account or significant commitment to set up a seller or advertiser account, raised
security concerns (e.g., providers of adult content), were not available in English, or simply provided an alternative user
interface to a GenAI product we already included (e.g., Facebook’s portal to Meta AI). We included only products that
were clearly labeled as using GenAI.
The resulting list consisted of 32 GenAI products that asked users for feedback, including 10 GenAI tools (e.g., OpenAI
ChatGPT, Google Gemini, Meta AI, Bing Copilot), 5 GenAI features in e-commerce services (e.g., Amazon’s Rufus,
Google Shopping’s AI Overview, Shopify’s Shop App AI), 11 GenAI features in other websites and apps (e.g., Google
Search, WhatsApp, Reddit), and 6 eBay GenAI features (e.g., item description generator, AI shopping assistant); see
Appx. A.2 for a full list.
We documented user interface and user experience (UX) design elements and navigation flows in the existing user
feedback collection approaches for GenAI features in those products, and taxonomized the design patterns along 16
dimensions, including entry points, UX writing, visual elements (like icons), feedback format, etc. (see Appendix A.1
for details). We also identified common usability issues and examples of good practices for collecting user feedback.
We collected initial feedback on the taxonomy, solicited additional dimensions that would be useful to document, and
discussed identified issues with cross-functional partners (including product managers (PMs), product and content
designers, UX researchers, and legal and privacy experts) across different teams at eBay.
3.2
Heuristic Evaluation
Based on Nielsen’s heuristic evaluation method guidance Nielsen and Molich [1990], Nielsen [1995], supplemented
by AI-specific issues identified during the usability inspection (§3.1), we developed 11 usability heuristics (such as
discoverability of entry point, ease of navigation, clarity of wording/information and process, consistency, etc.). Besides
4 eBay AI features available at the time, we selected 8 popular products from the taxonomy, including 4 dedicated
GenAI tools and 4 features in e-commerce services (see Appx. A.2 for details). Then we asked 24 experts at eBay
to systematically assess the approaches to user feedback collection in those products (including PMs, designers, UX
researchers, legal, engineering, privacy, etc.). Each stakeholder evaluated 3 randomly assigned products (1 of each
type). They independently evaluated how well each of the 11 heuristics was implemented on a 4-point Likert scale5,
5We intentionally excluded the middle point, to clearly identify positive and negative usability practices.
5


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
highlighted issues and positive aspects, and suggested improvements on each heuristic, using a provided template (see
Tables 1 and 2 in Appx. B). Participants were identified among eBay stakeholders involved in designing or consulting
on AI features (e.g., regarding legal advice), and invited either via direct emails, messages, or posts in relevant eBay
Slack channels.
We calculated the average Likert-scale ratings for each product per heuristic and overall, and synthesized common
themes in the open-ended responses regarding issues, positive aspects, and recommendations.
3.3
User Testing
Based on insights from the studies described above and informal consultation with eBay stakeholders across a range
of different roles about their use of feedback and future needs or plans for it, and in collaboration with relevant eBay
teams, we developed an initial set of guidelines and designed an interactive Figma prototype of a user feedback tool. We
mocked up entry points for 4 eBay GenAI features (2 for buyer-facing and 2 seller-facing ones) to make sure they were
discoverable and relevant across different design environments, including text-, image-, and recommendation-based AI
outputs.
To evaluate the prototypes, we ran remote moderated usability testing with 13 US-based buyers and sellers on eBay. We
distributed a screening survey to an eBay user panel, selected a mix of qualified participants (age 18+, native/bilingual
or fully proficient in English, who passed the screening survey attention checks), and invited them to one-hour Zoom
interviews. We took detailed notes during the interviews, which were supplemented by video- and screen-recordings
and automatic transcripts.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the 4 eBay GenAI features and one of 10 scenarios describing
potential issues they could encounter with those features across various categories (such as the system generating a
biased, inaccurate, or offensive response), to assess whether the tool can adequately capture different issues users could
face. When there was time, we tested additional issue scenarios and/or features, to collect more observations and to
identify within-subject variations in feature- and issue-specific preferences.6
After the warm up questions, we showed participants a short video clip demonstrating a typical interaction with the eBay
AI feature they were assigned, and asked them to imagine a scenario in which they encountered an issue while using
that feature. Then we asked them to open the interactive Figma prototype, share their screen, and show us how they
would inform eBay about the issue, while speaking out loud everything that was going through their minds, following
the cognitive walkthrough method. We observed their interactions with the prototype and took notes about their actions,
reactions, comments, questions, concerns, and confusions. If there was time, we also asked them to show us how they
would inform eBay if they had a positive experience with the feature instead, without any issues.
After they used the prototype tool, we shared our own screens and showed them one screenshot from the flow at a
time, asking about clarity and comprehension, concerns, visual appeal, and ease of use, referencing the notes from the
observation part when needed. For some of the screens, we also showed several variations in design and wording, to
understand preferences. We updated some of the mock-ups and wording between the sessions, based on participants’
feedback, to iteratively test these potential improvements.7
Using deductive thematic analysis, we identified, discussed, and resolved disagreements about the common themes,
challenges, and recommendations across different topics (e.g., regarding discovery of the entry point, clarity of wording,
opinions about feedback modalities, doubts and concerns, and impact of the feedback experience on perceptions of
eBay as a company). Based on the results, we refined the feedback tool prototypes and design guidelines (see the
refined final version in Appendix C).
3.4
Ethics and Confidentiality
The study involving user participation determined to be exempt from IRB oversight by ICSI’s Human Research
Protections Committee (protocol 2025-025). Participants provided consent electronically on the first page of the
screening survey. Heuristic evaluation was determined not to be human subjects research by ICSI’s HRPC (protocol
2025-014).
We associated users’ responses with a pseudonymous participant number rather than their personal identifiers. We
stored names and contact information for user testing participants separately from their interview data, and destroyed
that information after recruitment and payments were complete. We also manually removed personal identifiers from
6The full user testing protocol is included in the Supplementary Materials.
7The slides we used in this part are included in the Supplementary Materials. Most of the slides were used with all participants
assigned a given example feature, but a few of the A/B variants were added during the testing.
6


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
the transcripts. We stored the recordings and transcripts in a password-protected folder that only researchers directly
involved in this project had access to.
3.5
Limitations
The products included in our usability inspection and heuristic evaluations are limited to free popular services available
in English, from a subset of industries. However, while the list is not comprehensive, it includes many commonly
used digital products with GenAI features, with a large number of Internet users in the US, and often wide global
adoption. Many of these products are developed by large companies that have more design, legal, research/analysis, and
engineering resources than less popular products developed by smaller companies or individuals, and thus represent the
best effort and leading practices in collecting user feedback about GenAI features. Since our goal was to develop design
guidelines based on the identified common design patterns and usability issues (rather than to evaluate their prevalence),
we believe that our selection of reviewed products was sufficient and effective in achieving that goal. Future work can
explore design patterns and usability issues for GenAI feedback tools in other products, industries, and markets, and
regularly monitor changes in a quickly-evolving AI landscape.
This project was a collaboration between academic researchers and co-authors at eBay. This partnership allowed us
to ground our findings and recommendations in a practical use case that accounted for how GenAI product teams
currently use and want to use feedback, but necessarily incurred some trade-offs against breadth. Our expert heuristic
evaluators were eBay stakeholders, whose opinions may be influenced by the company’s culture and policies and by
e-commerce-specific considerations, and therefore not representative of the opinions of all product teams. However,
our procedures are generalizable and can be replicated broadly across companies and product types. Finally, our user
testing participants were all eBay users, which supports high ecological validity, but naturally limits generalizability.
Future work can engage broader groups of consumers as well as stakeholders from other companies and industries to
identify additional nuances or differences between them.
Due to the partnership with eBay, the design of the prototypes for user testing largely followed eBay’s design and
content guidelines, and the example features and scenarios were e-commerce-specific. However, the major design
patterns (such as entry points, feedback formats, interactions, and navigation flows) are broadly relevant, and the types
of issues explored in the scenarios were fairly generic. In addition, where possible, we tested variations that went
beyond eBay’s design guidelines and technical limitations. Thus, our recommendations are relatively generalizable
beyond the eBay or e-commerce scope.
4
Results by Research Phase
Since many of the findings from the benchmark taxonomy/usability inspection, heuristic evaluation, and user testing
overlap, we first present a brief overview of study-specific results for each phase in §4, and then summarize the findings
about usability issues that were informed by all those studies in §5, to avoid repetition.
4.1
Benchmark and Usability Inspection
Out of the 40 products with GenAI features we inspected, 8 did not have user feedback mechanisms at all. This suggests
that collecting user feedback about AI features is an emerging industry norm, at least among industry leaders, with 80%
of the popular products in our sample already doing it. However, current implementations are often slight modifications
of generic feedback mechanisms on overall satisfaction with the product/service or for reporting bugs, ignoring unique
issues specific to GenAI, such as biased, offensive, or inaccurate responses or unrealistic generated images.
In the reviewed examples, negative feedback was almost always requested, but positive feedback was solicited much
less often, or in less detail. Although many of the reviewed mechanisms allowed users to submit feedback about
the specific text response/output, feedback for images or the entire chat was much rarer.We also identified common
usability issues during our inspection, especially with respect to entry points, feedback modality options and flow, and
the submission step (see §5).
4.2
Heuristic Evaluation
The eBay team members who participated in the heuristic evaluation noted many of the same high-level issues as
the researchers found in the initial usability inspection (focusing on ease of navigation, clarity about goals, and user
value and encouragement). However, their varying expertise (across design, UX, compliance, etc.) allowed them to
give in-depth detail on a breadth of specific issues with the evaluated feedback tools, such as accessibility blocks,
unintuitive menu structures, gaps in privacy disclaimers, and hard-to-notice visual cues. They also identified good
7


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
practices that could easily be adapted to other products/companies vs. good practices that were likely to be relevant only
for particular use cases. In terms of ratings, we noted similar patterns and range in quality assessments for feedback
tools for dedicated GenAI tools vs. features in e-commerce); neither domain led in usability or overall satisfaction.
4.3
User Testing
We interviewed 13 participants total, including 8 who were mainly buyers and 5 who were mainly sellers. Participants’
ages varied between 36 and 70 years old. Nine participants were male and four were female. In terms of eBay tenure,
54% had been using eBay for over 15 years, 23% had been using it for 4–15 years, and another 23% for 1–3 years.
Only 8% were using eBay AI features daily, 31% weekly, 15% monthly, 8% at least once a year, and 38% less than
once a year. Each participant received 50 USD for completing the study.
Some participants immediately recognized the value of user feedback in fine-tuning AI models and fixing problems.
Others also saw obvious value in their feedback, but had doubts that product teams would actually read it or fix the
reported issues. After testing the prototype, participants said the fact that the tool seemed tailored specifically to GenAI
features increased their confidence that the company paid attention to user opinions and would use the feedback to try
to resolve issues. A few participants specifically noted that it is good to see platforms really trying to get it right when
implementing innovative GenAI features.
5
Findings about Usability of Feedback Mechanisms
The insights below combine analyses of data from all our studies. They are structured roughly according to the
dimensions that we derived from the usability inspection and used in the heuristic evaluation, though a few heuristics are
combined where findings are closely connected. We refer to user testing participants (among eBay users) as participants,
and heuristic evaluation participants (among eBay stakeholders) as evaluators.
5.1
User Value and Motivation
The text of entry point labels and feedback form headers provides an opportunity to invite and encourage, but evaluators
described the tone of some forms’ text as “transactional”, “corporate”, and unfriendly or flat. There often was no
mention of how users would directly benefit from providing feedback, or the user value was unclear and vague. For
instance, “your feedback will help improve the model” does not emphasize a direct benefit for the users, but rather for
the company. Similarly, explicit appreciation was rarely shown for users’ effort and contribution, e.g., via a “Thank you”
message (some features had only a “feedback submitted” message or even just fading check mark icon being displayed).
Uncareful wording may imply that only certain feedback is welcome (e.g., “provide helpful feedback”), which can be
off-putting for users.
User testing participants appreciated seeing a thank-you snackbar (a brief temporary message that appeared near the
bottom of the screen, in this case including a link to unsend the feedback) as an extra confirmation that their feedback
had been submitted, and most liked the tone. Several participants said it gave them the impression their feedback
would be taken seriously, though one suggested saying so explicitly, and explaining whether users will be contacted for
follow-up.
5.2
Consistency
There were frequent inconsistencies between mobile and web versions in content and/or flow that were not justified by
the smaller screen or touch-screen interactions. For instance, the entry points or rating scales, multiple-choice categories
(or their order) or feedback formats in general sometimes differed between the two versions. In some cases, only
negative feedback was solicited in the mobile flow, but both negative and positive feedback was solicited in the web
version; sometimes, there was no way to submit feedback in the mobile version at all, even though it was possible in the
web version. Entry points sometimes had different text for labels or links, or used text labels in one version but not the
other; wording and visual elements were inconsistent between web and mobile, or (where relevant) inconsistent with
other similar feedback mechanisms on the platform or how features were named elsewhere on the platform, impeding
clarity. Wording, shapes, or availability of buttons, and link and button treatment, were different between mobile and
web versions, even when it did not appear to be necessary for screen size optimization. “Thank you” messages were not
always present in both web and mobile versions. Privacy disclaimers were not provided in the mobile versions of some
products, or gave different information between the mobile and web versions.
8


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
5.3
Entry Point
5.3.1
Entry Point Signal
Thumbs up/down is a common, familiar, eye-catching signal for whether the AI feature gave a helpful/relevant response
or not, and were easily chosen by participants given scenarios about unhelpful or irrelevant responses. However, thumbs
up/down were not as obviously the correct path for scenarios that participants viewed as more serious (e.g., potentially
harmful), or that they viewed as technical issues. Some participants given such scenarios initially passed over the
thumbs to look for other paths—especially if they assumed the thumbs were only a voting mechanism, and not an entry
point for detailed feedback. In addition to looking for reporting options or customer support links in menus, some
participants expected (or at least wanted) to be able to report such issues via that chatbot directly, which they assumed
would allow for a more in-depth back-and-forth.
In some of the products assessed via heuristic evaluation, reporting legal issues was indeed a separate flow with a
separate entry point from reporting other problems. Some menus included entry points for multiple related actions, like
“Send Feedback” and “Report Violation” (or, worse, just “Report” without specifying what it was for).
When we tested alternative entry-point signals, they were mostly dispreferred to thumbs. Specifically, a text hyperlink
without thumbs did not allow for a quick, low-effort vote and could be less noticeable; a five-star scale seemed unclear
in scope and overly nuanced (“too many shades of gray”, P4), thus creating unnecessary cognitive load; a flag added
next to the thumbs confused some participants as to how it differed from thumbs-down. Evaluators also suggested that
five-level star ratings might feel over-precise for the nature of the question.
5.3.2
Entry Point Placement
Entry points for providing feedback are not always intuitive or easy to notice. Specifically, they are harder to discover
when 1) users need to hover over the output in the web version or long-press on the output in the mobile version; 2)
they are not visually adjacent to the generated output, or at least visible on the same screen; or 3) they are part of a
menu rather than an immediately visible icon, making the flow longer and less intuitive (e.g., users might expect to find
Settings or Chat History in a menu, but not feedback paths).However, some participants with serious-harm or technical
scenarios looked in the kebab menu for Reporting (or escalation) options.
All participants noticed the thumbs up/down icons when they were positioned below the AI output, even if they did
not recognize their purpose fully. They parsed thumbs below the response more quickly than thumbs above, as they
processed the screen top to bottom. When thumbs up/down were superimposed on an image (without any label), some
participants noticed them quickly, but others did not notice them at all, due to low color contrast and the icons blending
with some images.
The placement of the entry point can help users understand what the feedback should be about, but does not solve
all confusion. Even for apparently simple features (with a single generated item visible above the fold), participants
disagreed on whether feedback was supposed to be about the just-generated content or the feature as a whole. Thumbs
superimposed on a generated image were more likely (but not guaranteed) to be interpreted as being about the quality of
that specific image. For complex features that produced several outputs (e.g., generated text and recommended listings),
both evaluators and participants had quite varied interpretations of what an entry point below the whole response was
requesting feedback about—the recommended listings only, listings and generated content, or the feature as a whole.
However, the evaluators thought that providing separate entry points and flows for different types of content within a
response could still confuse users as to which one is for which output, and would require more time/effort from the user
if they wanted to provide feedback on multiple aspects or the whole feature.
5.3.3
Text Accompanying Entry Point
Text inviting feedback or providing labels for the entry point icons was often lacking entirely (with only the thumbs icon
being present). Some evaluators appreciated the simplicity, and were concerned that text displayed next to entry-point
icons could take too much space. However, a text label (especially if bolded) made the entry point more noticeable to
the user testing participants.
Where entry points did have text labels, some were vague (e.g., “Report”, “Downvote”, “How’d we do?”), were unclear
about what the user is expected to report, rate, or provide feedback on, and/or missed the opportunity to encourage
feedback or highlight user benefits from doing so (see §5.1). For many participants, “Give feedback” was sufficient to
indicate this was an entry point for details, not just a vote. For complex features that produced multi-modal outputs,
some participants thought the label could be especially useful in clarifying which part of the response the feedback was
for.
9


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
5.4
Navigation
Overall, navigation flows on mobile were typically longer, for example when long-press was the entry point instead of
an icon (i.e., long-press > menu choice > feedback form instead of thumbs up/down icon > feedback form). Flows for
reporting legal issues usually took more time/effort than providing feedback about other issues, due to having more
steps and branches, including far too much text to process, and/or including information that was more clearly relevant
to other products from the company.
Even for non-legal flows, evaluators found some questions or feedback forms too lengthy, with too many different
fonts/sizes, or unnecessary headings and subtitles. In a few cases, even buttons for basic actions like Submit were hard
to find.
5.4.1
Feedback Formats
Feedback formats typically include a binary vote (with thumbs up and down being the most common), and often (but
not always) accompanied by a request for details via multiple-choice categories (pills/chips or check boxes) and/or
open text comments. Some forms had several free-text questions (and no multiple-choice options), making the form
look long, which could be discouraging for users.
Not all participants and evaluators were expecting to be asked for detailed feedback after clicking on the thumbs icon
(especially the thumbs up icon, as they viewed such details as less important than details about negative feedback; on
the other hand, some appreciated being asked for details in either case). However, most participants appreciated having
a set of quick preset options listing common and important issues, or positive feedback categories. Even those that
preferred to use only the text box acknowledged that presets would make it easier for more people to leave feedback.
Participants mentioned that having presets made it seem more likely the feedback would be used constructively, since
it could more easily be routed to the right people working for the company that provided the AI feature. Similarly,
participants appreciated having an option to provide free-text comments, and several believed feedback was more likely
to be used if they both picked presets (for sorting) and wrote details in the text box (for specificity).
Some evaluators were surprised that their response was sent immediately on clicking one of the preset options, with no
opportunity to confirm.
5.4.2
Structure and Presentation of Multiple-Choice Preset Categories
In some cases, multiple-choice lists allowed only one choice, which may not be appropriate if users want to report several
issues. In the tested design using pills/chips—rounded capsule-shaped UI elements used for selectable items—the
majority of participants either were not sure they could pick multiple presets or assumed (incorrectly) that they could
not. Shown an alternative design with checkboxes, more participants recognized they could pick multiple options, but
several were still unsure. Moreover, some participants preferred pills to checkboxes because of the larger target area.
Too many preset multiple-choice options for negative feedback could be overwhelming. However, for the most part,
participants viewed the list of eight presets we tested as being a reasonable length to balance the need to “cover the
bases” against the need to keep it manageable for users. Several participants suggested adding “Other” at the bottom of
the list, to make it clear that feedback on other topics was welcome.
Some evaluators were concerned that pills/chips might not work well for longer keywords. Evaluators also thought that
preset options that included “Other” or “Something else” without a free-text box to specify further could feel uninviting
(even for users who would not have picked “Other” anyway), suggesting that the company was only interested in
predictable responses.
5.4.3
Responsible AI
While multiple-choice categories always included model performance and output quality issues (e.g., relevance, accuracy,
and tone), they only sometimes covered responsible AI (RAI) issues, such as harm, bias, or offensive content. When
covered, they were not always included among the top-level options, resulting in lower discoverability and requiring
users to exert more effort. Without explicit options, users may not be aware what RAI concerns can be associated with
GenAI features, and that the company is interested in getting signals from users about those concerns. (This is also one
of the disadvantages of not having preset options at all.) Some products included RAI-related concerns in their preset
options, but had only one or two relevant categories, which may lead to some concerns being under-reported. Some
products at least had a “Report” option, but not in the same pathway/mechanism where other types of feedback were
submitted, so users might not have known to look for them.
10


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
5.4.4
Presentation of Free-Text Box
The field label “Do you have any other feedback? (Optional)” led some participants to think the free-text box was
specifically for issues not covered by the preset options. It should be clear that free-text comments can be used to add
details about the issue indicated by the preset(s) or describe other issues.
A few participants and evaluators found versions of the design where the free-text box seemed small (two or three rows
tall) less inviting and suggesting the expectation of a short answer.
5.4.5
Option to Include a Screenshot or Recording Demonstrating the Issue
When asked, most participants thought it could be useful to include an option for capturing and submitting screenshots
or screen recording to document the issue, or at least were not opposed to it. However, when asked whether they would
bother to use such a thing, many said they probably would not use it under most circumstances, especially as some
assumed that session records would provide all the necessary context. However, if product teams find the context
information currently collected alongside feedback insufficient, participants had several suggestions for how to make a
screenshot option most useful/usable. Several participants wanted to be able to edit or annotate screenshots to clarify
the issue. While screen recordings could provide richer context, most participants expected screenshots to be easier both
to capture and to analyze. All participants said they would prefer if the screenshot could be captured automatically, with
several saying they would be less likely to do it if they had to attempt backing out of the form, finding or replicating
where they had the issue, and capturing the screenshot themselves.
5.5
User Control and Freedom
Some feedback forms were not optional or had non-optional parts, or it was hard to tell which parts of the detailed
feedback request were mandatory vs. optional. For instance, in some cases, the detailed open-text comments were
non-optional (or design choices make it look mandatory, e.g., when there was no explicit label saying it was optional).
In other cases, the multiple-choice question was non-optional, which might not be appropriate if the issue the user
experienced did not fall into any of the provided categories.
In the tested prototype, most participants understood that they could click “Send” to submit just their thumb vote without
choosing preset options or leaving free-text comments, as those fields were clearly labeled as “optional”. However,
several participants wondered about the value to eBay of having a feedback form where nothing was required, or
even suggested making the presets mandatory: “I don’t know if the word ‘optional’ is necessary. Sometimes the word
optional means you’re off the hook, you don’t have to go any further than this. ... but, you know, your intent is to get all
the feedback you can” - P11. In contrast, a couple of participants commented positively on the optionality of providing
details.
In many examples, users could not edit or unsubmit feedback submitted by mistake. Sometimes it was not possible
to submit feedback on multiple issues for the same interaction (e.g., by choosing more than one preset option or by
submitting multiple feedback forms about the same results/interaction). (However, some evaluators and user testing
participants found it confusing when they thought they could submit multiple forms about the same results/interaction;
see §5.6.)
In user testing, many participants did not notice there was an “Unsend” link in the thank-you snackbar until we drew
their attention to it. However, several participants thought there were situations where it could be useful to be able to
unsend or edit feedback (for example, if they sent something “in the heat of the moment”, P10), and noted they would
have been more likely to notice “Unsend” if they had been in such a situation. While 6 seconds was generally perceived
as sufficient time to make a decision about unsending, some participants would have preferred more time (e.g., 10
seconds). Several participants wanted to have a confirmation step before unsending their feedback.
5.6
Visibility of System Status
Sometimes there was no indicator at all (or no persistent indicator) that feedback was successfully submitted (such as
the thumbs icon changing color to filled), making it unclear to users whether their feedback was received or if there was
a technical issue. Sometimes that indicator was too subtle or too far away from the last user action on the screen, so it
was less likely to be noticed. Status signals may be too large/wordy and thus may feel too interruptive (for ephemeral
signals) or too cluttered (for persistent text signals). In some cases, clicking on the filled thumbs again would change
color to unfilled, but it was not explicitly explained whether that means the feedback got unsent/destroyed. Usually
there was no way to see details of feedback that was already submitted.
11


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
All participants understood that a filled thumb icon means that the feedback has been submitted. A majority of
participants did not expect to be able to submit feedback multiple times for the same AI output using the same thumb
icon. Therefore, many did not expect anything to happen if they clicked on the filled thumb again. However, a few
participants assumed that clicking on the filled icon would open a new form (creating confusion about what happened
to the previously submitted feedback), or that it might allow them to view or edit the submitted form. Asked what it
would mean if the filled thumb reverted to unfilled when clicked, participants were confused; some said they’d assume
it was a glitch, and some would worry that their submitted feedback was not recorded. Some participants thought the
feedback tool might allow them to send both positive and negative feedback for the same output, but several opined that
this would send mixed signals, and thus would not be helpful for eBay, or said it could create confusion about which
actions would cancel their prior vote.Most participants interpreted the thumb changing back to unfilled after the user
clicked “Unsend” link in the thank-you snackbar as confirmation that it was indeed unsent.
5.7
Clarity of Wording/Information
In addition to the header “Share your thoughts”, most participants preferred a design where the label above the presets
mentioned the specific feature the feedback is supposed to be about (e.g., “Tell us more about the issue with eBay’s AI
Shopping Assistant”). They found it more concrete, streamlined, clear, and inviting.
Evaluators noted that some examples referred to features using company-internal names that users may not recognize
(e.g., referring to an AI chatbot as “the agent” or “the assistant” without such names being used outside of the feedback
flow). They also found that unclear legalese jargon those used in legal-reporting flows and in privacy disclaimers,
potentially reducing user comprehension and making such disclaimers more alarming than helpful.
Clarity of Preset Options
The wording of the multiple-choice categories was often unclear (e.g., not explaining
what does it mean for the model output “Being lazy”), or contained jargon and abbreviations (e.g., “text rendering”,
“overactive refusal”, “bias”, “UI bug”). Evaluators found it hard to differentiate between “irrelevant” and “inaccurate”,
or thought that some presets sounded over-technical (framed from the product team’s point of view rather than the
user’s). They suggested balancing conciseness against clarity.
Most participants found the wording of most presets in tested prototype versions clear, but they were sometimes
uncertain about what the use cases were for a given category. For the main flow, we used “Inaccurate or unrealistic” to
cover a variety of problems with text and images. When offered alternative versions customized for specific features,
many participants found “misleading” to be more clearly broadly applicable, and more important than “unrealistic”,
especially for non-image features.
We tested several presets to cover Responsible AI concerns, with varying success. Some participants were not certain
how “Stereotyping or bias” would apply to GenAI features on eBay. Participants who chose it also picked “Offensive
or inappropriate” alongside. Thus, while capturing concerns about bias separately may be beneficial for the purposes
of ensuring compliance with responsible AI guidelines, it is likely that such issues could also be captured under a
more general category like “Offensive or inappropriate”. “Unsafe” was not well understood, and participants seemed
to primarily think of physical safety risks, rather than online safety threats like harassment or bullying. “Harmful or
unsafe” was also paired with “Offensive or inappropriate” rather than being chosen by itself. We therefore recommend
recombining these three presets into two that include the most operative terms, “Offensive or biased” and “Inappropriate
or harmful”.
Participants (especially those who were not given legal/copyright or privacy scenarios) had hard time imagining
situations where the “Legal or copyright issue” and “Privacy issue” preset options would be relevant. They also doubted
they (or other users) would be able to judge whether a situation is a legal, copyright, or privacy violation, so they had
low confidence in using those presets. We recommend combining the two categories into “Potential legal, copyright, or
privacy issue”, where “potential” emphasizes that eBay does not expect users to have legal expertise. Some product
teams may prefer to capture such issues via a separate reporting flow for legal issues, when users pick this option,
they could be re-directed to the relevant reporting page, or encouraged to submit the issue via both the present general
feedback form and the reporting flow (e.g., under the kebab menu > “Help and Report” on mobile (if available), or
using the “?” icon in the web version).
Several participants viewed the high-level “Not what I was looking for” as vague, and viewed a thumbs-down as
generally sufficient by itself to indicate that the offered options don’t appeal (i.e. they wouldn’t necessarily bother to
select a preset about it). Participants were more interested in presets we presented as alternatives, especially for the
seller-side features, that covered more specific problems like ignoring elements of the query or instruction, such as
“Missing important elements” or “Left out important info”.
12


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Nearly all of the participants preferred the more concise versions in the tested prototype to alternatives presets in a more
conversational format (e.g., “There was a technical problem” rather than “Technical problem”). Participants found the
conversational versions unnecessarily verbose, more difficult to distinguish, and more work to read and comprehend
(“The original is clearer because there are less words” - P4), discouraging them from providing feedback.
For the main testing flow, we presented the same list of presets for all four features. When we presented alternative
versions of the form where a few of the presets were customized to the most likely concerns for those specific features
(e.g., “Left out important info” for the Description Generator), a majority of those asked found the customized list more
relevant to the feature in question, and sometimes found it easier to see what the categories could apply to. However,
even if they liked the customized lists better, participants generally found the cross-feature list to be sufficiently relevant
and reasonably comprehensive. Some product teams may prefer to use custom lists, depending on their priorities and
capacity to design, parse, and analyze feedback from customized forms.
The tested prototype did not include preset options in the positive feedback form, but about half of the participants
thought presets could be helpful to speed up and simplify the positive feedback process. Participants suggested items
such as “good recommendations/listings”, “accurate and relevant text”, “liked the tone”, “visually attractive”, and “easy
to use”.
5.8
Clarity about the Process, Including Additional Information, Privacy Disclaimers, and Transparency
While in most cases, users were asked to confirm feedback submission, sometimes it was immediately submitted
without confirmation or asking for details. This was more common for the positive feedback, since many features ask
for details only where negative feedback is given. A few participants also mentioned that they would appreciate links to
customer service or FAQs somewhere in the feedback process, to escalate or get help in troubleshooting the issues.
In most of the products included in the usability inspection and heuristic evaluation, there was no indication of what
happens once the user provides feedback, how it will be used (e.g., for training or fine-tuning model outputs for all users
or for updating recommendations and preferences for the specific user based on their own feedback), who will see it
(e.g., other sellers or buyers, third-party companies, companies that built the LLMs powering the AI features) and under
what circumstances, what user data will be submitted along with the feedback (e.g., user ID, metadata about the device,
browser, session, last prompt only or the entire chat), and what are the potential consequences of providing feedback
(e.g., law enforcement involvement in case of serious violations or negative ratings on the platform; both of these
expectation could be discouraging from submitting feedback if users find those measures too harsh of a “punishment”).
In some cases, there was a disclaimer in the feedback form outlining some of this information (but rarely comprehensively
and clearly) and/or providing a “Learn more” link. In those examples, the disclaimer was not given upfront—information
about what would happen to the feedback was usually shown only after the user had clicked on the thumbs up/down
icon and brought up the detailed form, so in some cases the feedback vote had been already sent by the time the user
saw the disclaimer, without asking for confirmation. Disclaimers were not always placed near the form’s Submit button,
potentially hindering awareness.
“Learn more” links usually went to general disclosures for the whole product, which rarely explained what happens
with feedback specifically. The landing pages for “Learn more” were often long, or had multiple nested pages and
hyperlinks, making it hard to navigate and find specific information. Some were policy documents rather than more
user-friendly information formats, where the difficulty of finding specific information may discourage users from
providing potentially useful feedback. Moreover, use of italics or color alone to indicate a hyperlink for “Learn more”
may be not understood by users, and contrast of the hyperlink color was low in some examples, violating the WCAGG
contrast ratio guidelines Caldwell et al. [2008].
All participants found the privacy disclaimer we tested (which is not the same as eBay’s current disclaimer) to be
generally clear, saying it had standard provisions and language—though some noted they would be unlikely to read it in
real life. For the most part, reading the disclaimer did not change participants’ sentiments about feedback collection.
Most also said it did not change their understanding about the data practices, but a few found it improved their
understanding. However, some participants wanted the disclaimer (or the referenced links) to include specifics if anyone
besides the company itself (e.g., other users, third parties, AI services) would have access to submitted user feedback.
Even before reading the disclaimer, many user testing participants expected that the AI output and the interactions
that led to the issue would be included alongside a thumbs-down vote and the details they put in the form. However,
only two participants mentioned that additional data not entered by the user (such as metadata, location, or purchase
history) might be included, or retrieved via user ID. One participant was displeased to see that a session record would
be included, especially as it was unclear how far back that might stretch. However, most participants thought such
session context could be useful for resolving the issue.
13


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
When we showed an alternative version of the form where users could use a toggle to specify that their user ID should
not be sent with their feedback, some participants recognized the privacy benefits. However, in practice, a majority of
participants were not very concerned about non-anonymous feedback, and a few said they would be skeptical about
whether the toggle actually worked (i.e. they expected their data to be sent along with their feedback regardless of their
interaction with that toggle). Some participants actually viewed it as beneficial to include user IDs, to provide more
context for resolving issues and let eBay contact them with follow-up questions. In fact, a few participants assumed the
purpose of the toggle would be for them to request follow-up.
6
Design Recommendations
Based on the detailed investigation described in the previous section, we developed a comprehensive set of recom-
mendations for designing feedback tools for GenAI products and features. This section is organized according to the
same heuristic-based dimensions as §5. A concise set of guidelines ordered according to the feedback flow, including
example screen mock-ups, can be found in C.
6.1
User Value and Motivation
Use friendly, inviting, and conversational tone in the text of entry point labels and feedback form headers, highlighting
what value will users (not just the company or platform) receive from providing the feedback, e.g., the model’s ability
to suggest better or more customized recommendations (rather than benefits like “model improvements” that do not
clearly connect to user value). Positive tone can also be conveyed through visual elements, such as animating thumbs
when clicked.
After users submit the feedback, thank them for the effort of providing feedback, and reassure that although the company
may be unlikely to follow up with users individually, their feedback will be taken seriously. This is another opportunity
to highlight user value (however, if space is limited, and user value can only be highlighted once, prioritize doing it
earlier in the flow, to encourage users to provide feedback). Future research can test alternative message formats, as
snackbar functionality and word count is limited.
Transparency about data practices builds trust, and thus further supports motivation. Therefore, explain how feedback
will be used (see more details in §6.8).
6.2
Consistency
To avoid confusion, for a given product or feature, the same user feedback form should be offered across mobile
and web (to the extent possible given different affordances), with the same modes for requesting feedback (ratings,
multiple-choice presets, and free-text comments), the same preset multiple-choice options (ideally, in the same order),
and the same disclaimers and “Learn More” info. Ensure consistency in wording (e.g., of thank-you messages and
preset options), visual appearance (including entry-point icons), and link and button treatment across products, mobile
and web experiences, and different screen sizes. Ensure consistency of text strings with system design, and content and
brand guidelines. Teams should consult with content designers for up-to-date guidance.
6.3
Entry Point
6.3.1
Entry Point Signal
We recommend using high-contrast thumbs up/down icons as the main entry point for feedback on all types of issues, as
it imposes less cognitive load than a scale (e.g., star ratings).If space is particularly limited, product teams may consider
a single entry point for both positive and negative feedback, with an opportunity to select between the two votes, once
the feedback form is open. We advise providing a “Report a problem” option as an additional separate path (e.g., under
a kebab menu or other relevant menus, with a flag icon), that can be used to report bugs, potentially harmful content,
or legal concerns, in case users do not see thumbs as a likely (or “serious enough”) entry point for feedback on those
issues. If feasible, it is recommended to add a direct link to customer support and/or a troubleshooting FAQ somewhere
in the feedback flow (e.g., in the thank-you message; see §6.1, to allow users to escalate the issues, hear back from the
company, or troubleshoot more common issues). Ideally, entry points should be visible, without the user needing to
hover over or long-press on anything.
14


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
6.3.2
Entry Point Placement
For simple features that generate one content item (e.g., only text response, or only an image), position the feedback
entry point immediately below the generated content, where users already expect to see action options, like Copy and
Edit. The heuristic evaluators also liked the alternative placing of the entry point to the right of the response in the
chat-style designs; product teams can test that placement if it is appropriate for the design of their product.
For complex features that return multi-modal responses or multiple recommendations or listings, further testing of the
optimal entry point placement may be needed. When developing such multi-modal prototypes, we suggest obtaining
separate feedback streams for each part of a complex feature, placing separate entry points as close as possible to each
part (e.g., icons superimposed on the content, with high contrast, following accessibility guidelines Caldwell et al.
[2008]), with labels. If multiple entry points are not feasible, consider allowing users to choose which part they want to
provide feedback on.
To solicit feedback on the whole feature and all the things it does, thumbs at the bottom (below all the results) offer the
best clarity based on our user testing results. However, this may sacrifice the quantity of responses if users do not scroll
all the way down, and it is incompatible with “infinite scroll” design features.
6.3.3
Text Accompanying Entry Point
We recommend using a boldface text label above the thumb icons inviting users to provide feedback in a friendly tone.
A concise phrase like “Share feedback” can be used for simple cases. For more complex features, it may be helpful to
specify the scope of the requested feedback, if there is space (e.g., “Share feedback on image” vs. “Share feedback
on [feature name]”). Supplemental signals later in the flow (e.g., headers or drop-downs within the feedback form)
can further clarify the exact scope of the feedback request. It may still be helpful to include preset multiple-choice
options that pertain to all parts of the response in each feedback form, in case users click the wrong one or want to leave
feedback on multiple aspects.
Additional hover-over text for the entry-point icons can be used in the web version (e.g., “Give positive feedback” /
“Give negative feedback”). Note that “Like”/ “Helpful” and “Dislike”/“Not helpful” do not necessarily reflect the variety
of feedback categories, and could prime users to focus on aesthetics or user value rather than other aspects of the output
(such as RAI issues). After the initial release of the feedback mechanism, it can be helpful to also use a tooltip to
increase user awareness and comprehension of it.
6.4
Navigation
Follow accessibility guidelines Caldwell et al. [2008] to make sure all content and actions are easily discoverable and
usable.
6.4.1
Feedback Formats
Besides the positive/negative feedback (such as thumbs voting), allow users to provide optional additional feedback via
quick preset multiple-choice options and free-text response (regardless of whether users picked “Other” or any other
preset category), as it helps to both systematize feedback, and signal intent to analyze and address feedback to the users.
While implicit feedback mechanisms were out of scope in this research, future work can explore such mechanisms, e.g.,
by provide clickable follow-up question recommendations in the AI chatbot, to help users realize that they can obtain
more information or refine the results in a conversational manner.
6.4.2
Structure and Presentation of Multiple-Choice Preset Categories
For both positive and negative feedback, include six to eight quick preset options for users to choose from. Include
“Other” as the last option to make it clear to the user that their feedback is not limited to the provided preset options.
If space is limited, consider a nested structure with top-level categories (e.g., by general type or source of problem)
and more detailed subcategories. Such nested or drop-down menus take less space, but consider that they require extra
user action and do not provide a quick overview of all the preset options until users click on them. Preset options for
negative feedback should cover the issues users are most likely to encounter, as well as RAI concerns, and items of
particular interest to the product team; see examples in the guidelines in Appx. C. Product teams may wish to include
customized lists reflecting their priorities instead of using the templates. However, using standardized templates (at
least across different features within a company or a product) allow to compare user signals across features.
15


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
We recommend monitoring the use of different preset options, then place often used ones on top of the list, and maybe
remove or re-word rarely used ones. However, we do not recommend removing RAI categories, because they provide
an important signal, despite potentially rare incidents/use.
Allow users to select multiple preset options at once (and include “Choose all that apply” in the label for the preset
options) instead of submitting several feedback forms to signal various issues. Use designs with relatively large target
area to make it easy for user to click/tap on them (e.g., pills or chips—rounded capsule-shaped UI elements used for
selectable items—instead of checkboxes). Other design consideration to keep in mind: checkboxes may allow for
longer text as they have less padding than pills/chips, but checkboxes require vertical alignment, which would fit well in
the layout on mobile devices, but pills/chips do not require vertical alignment and can take less space, especially in
landscape/horizontal orientations, which are more typical for web versions.
6.4.3
Responsible AI
Include preset multiple-choice options reflecting Responsible AI principles, e.g., allow users to report offensive, harmful,
biased, inappropriate, or unexpectedly sexual images, text, or product recommendations. Consider providing additional
channels/flows for flagging, reporting, or escalating particularly serious issues (such as harmful or illegal content).
6.4.4
Presentation of Free-Text Box
Provide a substantial free-text box with an unambiguously broad field label such as “Do you have any additional
comments? (Optional)”. Make the input field a medium size to encourage or allow for longer open-ended comments.
6.4.5
Option to Include a Screenshot or Recording Demonstrating the Issue
We do not recommend including an option to capture a screenshot or video of the potential issue, unless preset options,
free text, and session records sent along with the feedback are not sufficient to clearly understand problems with a
particular feature. If product teams find it useful, we suggest offering users an option to easily attach a screenshot that is
captured automatically (without requiring users to close the form to try to replicate the issue, potentially losing the
current state, or creating concerns about losing it), with a possibility to edit or annotate it.
6.5
User Control and Freedom
Make exiting the feedback form without submitting it easy and intuitive, e.g., by using scrim, “Cancel” button at the
bottom, and/or X or back button in the corners. Make the preset multiple-choice options and free-text responses optional,
and make it clear they are optional (e.g., by labeling it as such in the header), in addition to making the “Submit” button
immediately active, without forcing users to provide details in addition to their thumbs vote. Use headers that intuitively
emphasize the optionality of providing details, e.g., “Would you like to tell us more?” or “Can you tell us more?”
instead of “What did you like/dislike about this response?”. (Note that if a user thinks they have to provide detail but
they do not feel like it, they may just exit without even submitting the thumbs vote, and a binary signal without details
is still better than no signal at all).
If functionality allows, allow users to unsubmit the feedback, at least within a short period of time (e.g., 5-10 seconds)
after submitting. Users should be able to confirm that action before feedback is unsent/deleted. Future research can
test an option to edit feedback (in addition to, or instead of unsending it). For example, a temporary “Edit” link/button
could return users to the filled form and allow them to edit and “Send”, or to “Unsend” it.
6.6
Visibility of System Status
Highlight selected preset multiple-choice options clearly within details dialogs. If there are nested preset options, make
sure the higher-level categories/choices are still visible while the user is being asked to choose the lower-level categories
(e.g., using drop-downs within the same dialog, or if generating a new dialog to make lower-level choices, use the
higher-level category as a heading).
Change the thumbs icons’ colors from empty to filled to indicate that the feedback has been submitted. In parallel,
show a brief confirmation that feedback has been submitted, unsubmitted or updated after editing, e.g., with a 2-second
concise pop-up message. Allow users to view the feedback they have sent (e.g., by hovering over the filled thumb).
Based on the user testing findings, the least confusing pattern is to allow only one feedback form submission per AI
output, and disable interaction with the thumbs after feedback has been submitted (regardless of whether the snackbar
or thank you message is still visible).
16


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
6.7
Clarity of Wording/Information
If space allows, use a subheader, label, or contextual prompt that calls out the specific feature or user action the feedback
is meant to be about, in a readable font size. Use concise, clear, user-friendly wording and keywords in preset options
and other text. Avoid technical and legal jargon, e.g., instead of “bias”, consider using easy-to-understand words, like
“offensive”, “unfair”, “one-sided”, “shows prejudice.” Ideally, evaluate the wording comprehension in user testing. Even
for issues where long passages of legalese text are necessary, minimize information overload by only providing the
information that pertains to the specific product or feature, and is concise and truly necessary, instead of referring to the
entire privacy policy or other long document that contains information not relevant to the feature.
6.8
Clarity about the Process, Including Additional Information, Privacy Disclaimers, and Transparency
To implement progressive disclosure, and balance transparency with usability and space limitation, include links to
further information (e.g., via “Learn more” links) in a brief privacy disclaimer, placed where it is relevant to decision-
making, e.g., next to the “Submit” button. Specify that those links will say more about who can see what data (especially
whether other users, third-party AI services, or law enforcement (e.g., in case of reported legal issues) will be able to
access it), and how that data will be used (including if users can expect to be contacted by the company about their
feedback, if there could be any legal repercussions to the user, other buyers or sellers, or the company, for reporting
issues). If space is particularly limited, disclaimers within the feedback dialog could be collapsed, with an expansion
icon (such as question mark “?” or exclamation mark “!” icons). However, note that such collapsed version may be less
easily discoverable and clear to the users. While users rarely read small-text disclaimers, their presence alone instills
confidence that one can find out more about it if they wanted to, and build trust towards the company. We recommend
crafting a tailored landing page for the “Learn more” link that explains data practices with respect to user feedback
(e.g., in the FAQ format), rather than linking to generic explanation of data practices for the whole site/product, privacy
policy, privacy notice, or user agreement documents. Consider making this information always accessible (e.g., on
a company’s website) even after the feedback form is closed. Wording of disclosures should be carefully crafted to
be clear and concise, while avoiding scaring users. Make sure that disclaimers about how user data is handled meet
country-specific legal requirements. Use clear indicators for the “Learn more” links, in alignment with the company’s
design guidelines and WCAGG accessibility guidelines Caldwell et al. [2008] (e.g., underline or underline plus another
signal (such as different color or bolding).
Although in our user testing, we did not find support for users’ desire to anonymize their feedback, we encourage
product teams to test that option with their users, as these preferences may be culture-, product-, and context-specific.
If feasible, the thank-you message after users submit the feedback could link to a troubleshooting FAQ page, customer
support contacts, and/or a path for reporting certain types of issues.
7
Discussion and Future Work
7.1
Implications: The Value of Usable, Actionable Feedback Mechanisms for GenAI
For a long time, human participation in development of AI models was limited to human-generated content in training
datasets, which led to biases, unfairness, and other ethical issues Denton et al. [2020], Sloane et al. [2022]. Much of the
existing work on AI governance and participation still focuses on pre-deployment or active development stages, such as
co-designing fairness checklists Madaio et al. [2020] or establishing operational Responsible AI (RAI) guidelines for
diverse technical and non-technical stakeholders Constantinides et al. [2024]. Post-deployment user feedback embeds
another form of participation that can help detect biases, ethics breaches, and other issues.
However, post-deployment mechanisms currently in use often rely on binary thumbs up/down mechanisms (which
can accumulate a large but shallow pool of feedback). Prior work on use of input for model tuning has shown that
such binary feedback signals fail to capture the multi-dimensional nature of generative outputs Collins et al. [2025],
Wu et al. [2023]. As AI agents progress along a spectrum of autonomy, users’ roles are shifting from that of active
operators who instruct the system and evaluate outputs, to observers who monitor system behavior, within minimal
involvement in system actions Feng et al. [2025]. This increasing autonomy, and the accompanying complexity of those
systems, make it more difficult to engage users meaningfully. In this context, binary feedback signals are insufficient to
capture dimensions such as safety, bias, fairness, and representational harms that are highlighted as societal risks in
human-centered AI research Tahaei et al. [2023a].
At the same time, prior work has shown that richer feedback is difficult to elicit and use effectively Collins et al. [2025].
We found that richer modes of explicit feedback collection, when used, are often not aligned with usability best practices,
and are not structured in a way that is clearly useful for improving products. While user feedback systems are expected
17


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
to function as data collection infrastructures for alignment with evolving human values, their usability limitations and
weak integration into pipelines reduce their effectiveness. (Similar to the gap between high-level design principles,
such as privacy by design, and practical implementation by developers Tahaei et al. [2023b].) This gap persists despite
urgent calls to action, including recent mandates for post-market monitoring by NIST National Institute of Standards
and Technology [2026], and broader calls to democratize AI inputs Vincenzi et al. [2024], Brown et al. [2019].
This suggests an opportunity to bridge post-deployment monitoring with real-world, user-driven feedback loops that
more directly inform model updates and system behavior. However, research is sparse on how post-deployment feedback
mechanisms should be designed. Our research sought to address this gap in both research and practice, by providing
practical, actionable guidelines for companies to advance beyond the current status quo.
By providing design recommendations, a flexible prototype that is relevant for a range of contexts, and a model for
stakeholder consultation, we aim to help companies streamline their feedback processes for fine-tuning AI models,
across product teams with a variety of goals relevant for those companies. Our engagement with an industry partner,
eBay, helped us to ground our recommendations in practical needs and considerations, and helped eBay to optimize
their feedback processes and be better prepared to implement requirements for developing responsible AI and protecting
users from harm.
At the same time, our results contribute to human-centered AI by investigating how feedback is given and used in
GenAI products and features and what concerns are centered by current feedback mechanisms, positioning feedback
mechanisms as socio-technical systems rather than purely interaction features.
7.2
Future Work: Expanding User Engagement beyond Feedback Mechanisms
Recent trends in critical AI scholarship position user feedback mechanisms as a first step towards meaningful partici-
pation in AI development, with deeper engagement provided by participatory research that involves communities in
decision-making and aims to democratize technology design Huang et al. [2024], Birhane et al. [2022], Bondi et al.
[2021], Crawford [2021], Hashmati et al. [2025]. User feedback tools in GenAI interfaces are a (relatively) feasible way
to invite users to react to system outputs, but often do so in highly structured, provider-defined ways. They thus sit
squarely in the tension between the need for practical, actionable input that meets product teams’ goals, and the need
for fuller participatory mechanisms that encourage product teams to align their work with societal goals.
The goal of the research described in this paper was to increase participation by providing guidance for making user
feedback mechanisms a more usable, meaningful, and practicable part of AI development. However, developers and
designers of AI systems should not limit users’ participation to rating- or survey-based user feedback mechanisms
only, and should explore other forms of meaningful engagement of users in the design process Delgado et al. [2023],
Corbett et al. [2023]. Recent research suggests that “participation brokers”, who facilitate the inclusion of users into
shaping of AI systems, are well-positioned to scaffold such participation through user education, advocacy, speculative
design activities, and developing methodologies for integrating user feedback into AI development and related policy
processes Cooper and Zafiroglu [2024].
Participatory AI research frequently references Arnstein’s foundational “ladder of citizen participation” Arnstein [1969]
to categorize participatory AI efforts. For example, Sloane et al. [2022] categorize participation into work, consultation,
and justice, while Delgado et al. [2023] propose a four-level framework: consult, include, collaborate, and own. Within
these frameworks, the collection of user feedback in GenAI systems can be considered “work” or “consultation.” There
is a need to explore how higher levels of participation can be made more feasible.
In particular, new post-deployment modes of participation should be explored. As Feffer et al. [2023] note in their
literature survey, embedding structured participation into AI requires assessing how systems engage stakeholders
throughout deployment. Moreover, some stakeholders in our study expressed a preference for feedback mechanisms
that support ongoing engagement rather than one-off signals. They envisioned feedback as an iterative process through
which users are consulted and involved in shaping systems’ behaviors. This aligns with broader work on iterative
feedback loops and continuous learning in socio-technical systems Thoughtworks [2023].
As AI systems increase in autonomy, feedback mechanisms must be reconceptualized as end-to-end socio-technical
processes embedded within AI governance. Rather than isolated UI features, they should enable transparency and
accountability across multiple levels: informing model development/improvement and product decisions, supporting
regulatory compliance, and, at the highest levels of participation, providing consumers with meaningful insight into how
systems operate. Such systems could play a critical role in aligning increasingly autonomous AI agents with evolving
human values at individual, organizational, and societal scales.
Standardization of user feedback mechanisms, on the one hand, facilitates building more efficient pipelines between user
input and model fine-tuning, but on the other hand, standardization may result in homogenization of user input, creating
18


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
risks for amplifying biases, suppressing diverse perspectives Eubanks [2018], and imposing values not congruent
to specific contexts Gabriel and Keeling [2025]. Prior work has also emphasized the importance of accounting for
individual characteristics of raters, annotators, and feedback contributors Goyal et al. [2022], Prabhakaran et al. [2021],
including dempographic differences in how users interact with feedback systems Mishra et al. [2026]. For example,
the use of “helpful, honest, harmless” framework in RLHF Askell et al. [2021], Bai et al. [2022] does not account
for cultural and epistemic differences in the definitions and cross-context interpretations of those values Denton et al.
[2020], Sambasivan et al. [2021], Gabriel and Keeling [2025], Davani et al. [2024]. Thus, it is important not to constrain
user feedback to predefined multiple-choice categories only, but rather to allow open-ended comments and integrate
other forms of user participation, to complement user feedback mechanisms.
Challenges remain in capturing representative public perspectives and designing feedback systems that reflect diverse
user experiences Tahaei et al. [2024]. Looking forward, there is an opportunity to develop holistic frameworks that link
individual-level feedback on specific outputs with aggregated, population-level insights, providing a longitudinal view
of societal expectations. A survey of participatory AI projects found that they have been focused on a few homogeneous
user groups Delgado et al. [2023]. Scaled technical systems that do not account for diversity can exacerbate existing
inequalities and further marginalize underrepresented views Eubanks [2018], Kirk et al. [2024]. Thus, future work can
explore opportunities to broaden participation and better include underrepresented communities in the design of AI
systems. For instance, our evaluations of current mechanisms noted some accessibility issues. Greater attention could be
paid to ensuring accessibility in feedback mechanisms, including multi-modal forms of participation (e.g., not just just
text-, but also voice-based feedback), to engage users with lower literacy levels or low vision. (Multi-modal feedback is
also shown to result in superior model training Xu et al. [2023].) In addition, collecting metadata and socio-demographic
information about users who provide feedback can help control for potential sample bias. The PRISM framework Kirk
et al. [2024] could be utilized to further ensure the collected feedback is Participatory, Representative, Individualized,
Subjective, and Multicultural.
8
Conclusion
In a collaborative study between academic researchers and eBay partners, we explored the landscape of how products
with GenAI features currently collect feedback from users and heuristically evaluated example feedback mechanisms;
conducted research with eBay users about how they view feedback processes; and developed and user-tested a
flexible, evidence-grounded prototype feedback tool. In the process, we identified common issues with current
tools and developed recommendations for requesting feedback from users of GenAI products and features. Major
recommendations focus on making feedback entry points easily recognizable and inviting; using language that shows
appreciation for feedback and motivates how users will benefit from giving it; giving the user options to provide simple
binary feedback, quickly pick from among common issues, or provide details in text, letting them choose their level of
effort and engagement; and providing clear signals about when feedback has been submitted and what will happen to it.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by eBay’s Research and University Partnership for Technology (eRUPT) grant program,
and many individuals at eBay shared their time and expertise with us. We especially thank Circe Granholm for insights
into eBay’s current user feedback processes and for structural suggestions; Barbara Kofler for contributions to the
prototype and content guidelines; and Imman Abishek, Sujayendran Surendran, and the eBay Expressions team for
assistance in recruiting users to test the prototype. We are also grateful to the expert heuristic evaluators, and to other
eBay stakeholders who shared their experiences and suggestions.
Disclosure of Interests
The work of two of the authors (Frik and Bernd) was supported by a grant from eBay to the International Computer
Science Institute, via its eRUPT program that promotes collaborations between eBay and academic researchers. The
other two (Karami and Tahaei) are eBay employees, and worked on this research as part of their regular employment
at eBay.8 As described in the paper, we used current eBay features as examples in some studies and consulted with
various eBay employees across different teams, and the heuristic evaluators were from eBay. eBay reviewed the paper
manuscript and made edits to avoid revealing confidential information in conflict with their interests.
8Tahaei is also affiliated with the International Computer Science Institute, but worked on this project in his eBay capacity.
19


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
eBay plans to implement some of the recommendations described in the paper, including using a version of the prototype
tool as the basis for a new feedback survey template for GenAI features.
Research design and conduct were led by the non-eBay researchers, who do not have any personal financial interests in
eBay, to ensure the project focused on scientific investigation of the research questions. In particular, to avoid potential
bias, user testing of the prototype was planned, conducted, and analyzed by the non-eBay researchers. We explained
this to participants, to allay any concerns about giving offense and avoid any potential worries about consequences on
the platform. eBay employees did not access documentation linking participants’ eBay IDs and other PII with user
testing responses.
For transparency, we mention the collaborative nature of the project in the abstract and Introduction to the paper (§1),
and discuss both the advantages and the trade-offs of the project’s focus on and engagement with eBay in the Limitations
section (§3.5).
Use of Generative AI
We used Figma Make to assist in converting the human-composed screens in the prototype into a clickable live version
for the user testing. The resulting flows were checked by a human to make sure they worked as intended, and that the
original text and visual content were not altered.
Some of the suggestions in the visual guidelines (Appx. C) were edited for smoothness using ChatGPT (various
versions). The resulting text was checked by a human and, where necessary, revised to maintain the originally intended
meaning.
Some passages in the paper were edited using Gemini 3.1 Pro and GPT 5.5 Pro to ensure the writing was clear, consistent,
and grammatically correct. The human who wrote the original draft of those passages reviewed the proofreading/edits
to make sure the original tone, content, and facts were preserved.
Data Availability
We are not releasing user walkthrough/interview transcripts because participants did not consent to public sharing of
their data (even in de-identified form). However, to support reproducibility, we have included the walkthrough and
interview protocol in the Supplementary Materials.
References
Yuan Sun, Eunchae Jang, Fenglong Ma, and Ting Wang. Generative ai in the wild: Prospects, challenges, and strategies.
In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’24, New York, NY,
USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400703300. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642160. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642160.
OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. OpenAI, 2022. URL https://openai.com/index/chatgpt/. Accessed 2026-03-28.
Mohammad Tahaei, Marios Constantinides, Daniele Quercia, and Michael Muller. A systematic literature review of
human-centered, ethical, and responsible ai. ACM Journal on Responsible Computing, 2023a. Advance online
publication / preprint available.
Negin Hashmati, Hugo Wärnberg, Emmanuel Brorsson, and Mohammad Obaid. eXplainable AI interfaces with (and for)
expert operators: A participatory design approach. In Proceedings of the 36th Australasian Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, OzCHI ’24, page 324–336, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9798400715099. doi:10.1145/3726986.3727020. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3726986.3727020.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (ai rmf 1.0).
Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2023.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework: Generative artificial
intelligence profile. Technical Report NIST AI 600-1, NIST, 2024.
OpenAI. Sycophancy in gpt-4o: What happened and what we’re doing about it. OpenAI, 2025a. URL https:
//openai.com/index/sycophancy-in-gpt-4o/. Accessed 2026-03-28.
OpenAI. How your data is used to improve model performance. OpenAI Help Center, 2025b. URL https://help.
openai.com/en/articles/5722486-how-your-data-is-used-to-improve-model-performance.
Ac-
cessed 2026-03-28.
20


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Google. Send feedback or report a problem with gemini apps. Google Help, 2025. URL https://support.google.
com/gemini/answer/13275746. Accessed 2026-03-28.
Microsoft.
Providing
feedback
about
microsoft
copilot
with
microsoft
365
apps.
Mi-
crosoft
Support,
2025.
URL
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/
providing-feedback-about-microsoft-copilot-with-microsoft-365-apps-c481c26a-e01a-4be3-bdd0-aee0b0b2a4
Accessed 2026-03-28.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Challenges to the monitoring of deployed ai systems. Technical Report
NIST AI 800-4, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2026.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2024/1689 of the european parliament and
of the council of 13 june 2024 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act),
2024. Official Journal of the European Union, OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024.
Justin D Weisz, Michael J Muller, Jiao He, and Stephanie Houde. Toward general design principles for generative ai
applications. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI), pages 73–89.
ACM, 2023.
Q. Vera Liao and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. Ai transparency in the age of llms: A human-centered research roadmap,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01941.
JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y Wong, Björn Hartmann, and Qian Yang. Why johnny can’t prompt: How non-ai
experts try (and fail) to design llm prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 1–21. ACM, 2023.
Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier Rando, Rachel Freedman,
Tomasz Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, Tony Wang, Samuel Marks, Charbel-Raphaël Segerie, Micah Carroll,
Andi Peng, Phillip Christoffersen, Mehul Damani, Stewart Slocum, Usman Anwar, Anand Siththaranjan, Max
Nadeau, Eric J. Michaud, Jacob Pfau, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Xin Chen, Lauro Langosco, Peter Hase, Erdem
Bıyık, Anca Dragan, David Krueger, Dorsa Sadigh, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Open problems and fundamental
limitations of reinforcement learning from human feedback, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15217.
Donald A Norman. Cognitive engineering. In Donald A Norman and Stephen W Draper, editors, User centered system
design: New perspectives on human-computer interaction, pages 31–61. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986.
Donald A Norman. The design of everyday things. Basic books, 2013.
Hannah Rose Kirk, Andrew M Bean, Bertie Vidgen, Paul Röttger, and Scott A Hale. The past, present and better future
of feedback learning in large language models for subjective human preferences and values. In Proceedings of the
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2409–2430, 2023.
Jinying Lin, Zhen Ma, Randy Gomez, Keisuke Nakamura, Bo He, and Guangliang Li. A review on interactive
reinforcement learning from human social feedback. IEEE Access, 8:120757–120765, 2020.
Shane Griffith, Kaushik Subramanian, Jonathan Scholz, Charles L Isbell, and Andrea L Thomaz. Policy shaping:
Integrating human feedback with reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 26,
2013.
Carl Orge Retzlaff, Srijita Das, Christabel Wayllace, Payam Mousavi, Mohammad Afshari, Tianpei Yang, Anna Saranti,
Alessa Angerschmid, Matthew E Taylor, and Andreas Holzinger. Human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning: A
survey and position on requirements, challenges, and opportunities. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 79:
359–415, 2024.
Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and
Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini
Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort,
Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from
human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith, Mari Ostendorf,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback gives better rewards for language model training. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:59008–59033, 2023.
21


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Katherine M. Collins, Najoung Kim, Yonatan Bitton, Verena Rieser, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Yushi Hu, Sherol Chen,
Senjuti Dutta, Minsuk Chang, Kimin Lee, Youwei Liang, Georgina Evans, Sahil Singla, Gang Li, Adrian Weller,
Junfeng He, Deepak Ramachandran, and Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham. Beyond thumbs up/down: Untangling
challenges of fine-grained feedback for text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES ’24, page 293–303. AAAI Press, 2025.
Richard H Thaler and Cass R Sunstein. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. Yale
University Press, 2008.
Richard H Thaler, Cass R Sunstein, and John P Balz. Choice architecture. The behavioral foundations of public policy,
25:428–439, 2013.
Robert Münscher, Max Vetter, and Thomas Scheuerle. A review and taxonomy of choice architecture techniques.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 29(5):511–524, 2016.
Eric J Johnson, Suzanne B Shu, Benedict GC Dellaert, Craig Fox, Daniel G Goldstein, Gerald Häubl, Richard P Larrick,
John W Payne, Ellen Peters, David Schkade, et al. Beyond nudges: Tools of a choice architecture. Marketing letters,
23(2):487–504, 2012.
Lorrie F Cranor. A framework for reasoning about the human in the loop. 2008.
Ximeng Chen, Xiaohong Wang, and Yanzhang Qu. Constructing ethical ai based on the “human-in-the-loop” system.
Systems, 11(11):548, 2023.
S Shyam Sundar and Sampada S Marathe. Personalization versus customization: The importance of agency, privacy,
and power usage. Human communication research, 36(3):298–322, 2010.
Yangkun Huang and Xucheng Cao. Calling on the third-party privacy control into algorithmic governance framework:
Linking users’ presumed influence with control agency theory. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 35
(4):edad036, 2023.
Omer Tene and Jules Polonetsky. Big data for all: Privacy and user control in the age of analytics. Nw. J. Tech. & Intell.
Prop., 11:239, 2012.
Eliezer Yudkowsky. The ai alignment problem: why it is hard, and where to start. Symbolic Systems Distinguished
Speaker, 4(1):1–20, 2016.
Iason Gabriel. Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment: I. gabriel. Minds and machines, 30(3):411–437, 2020.
Vafa Ghazavi and Iason Gabriel. The challenge of value alignment: From fairer algorithms to ai safety. The Oxford
handbook of digital ethics, pages 336–355.
Roxana Radu. Steering the governance of artificial intelligence: national strategies in perspective. Policy and society,
40(2):178–193, 2021.
Inga Ulnicane, William Knight, Tonii Leach, Bernd Carsten Stahl, and Winter-Gladys Wanjiku. Governance of artificial
intelligence: Emerging international trends and policy frames. In The global politics of Artificial Intelligence, pages
29–56. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2022.
Esther Franks, Bianca Lee, and Hui Xu. Report: China’s new ai regulations. Global Privacy Law Review, 5(1), 2024.
European Commission.
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down
harmonised rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and amending certain union legislative acts,
2021. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206.
European
Commission.
Hiroshima
process
international
code
of
conduct
for
ad-
vanced
ai
systems,
2023a.
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/
hiroshima-process-international-code-conduct-advanced-ai-systems.
European
Commission.
Hiroshima
process
international
guiding
principles
for
ad-
vanced
ai
system,
2023b.
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/
hiroshima-process-international-guiding-principles-advanced-ai-system.
AI Safety Summit. The bletchley declaration by countries attending the ai safety summit. Policy paper, 2025. https:
//www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-safety-summit-2023-the-bletchley-declaration/
the-bletchley-declaration-by-countries-attending-the-ai-safety-summit-1-2-november-2023.
UNESCO.
Ethics of artificial intelligence.
https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/
recommendation-ethics.
Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh,
Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori Inkpen, Jaime Teevan, Ruth Kikin-Gil, and Eric Horvitz. Guidelines for
human-ai interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
22


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
CHI ’19, page 1–13, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450359702.
doi:10.1145/3290605.3300233. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300233.
Google. The people + ai guidebook. URL https://pair.withgoogle.com/guidebook/.
ANTHONY M Barrett, Jessica Newman, Brandie Nonnecke, Dan Hendrycks, EVAN R Murphy, and Krystal Jackson.
Ai risk-management standards profile for general-purpose ai systems (gpais) and foundation models. Center for
Long-Term Cybersecurity, UC Berkeley. https://perma. cc/8W6P-2UUK, 2023.
Ned Cooper and Alexandra Zafiroglu. Constraining participation: Affordances of feedback features in interfaces to
large language models. ACM J. Responsib. Comput., 2(4), October 2025. doi:10.1145/3748516. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3748516.
Hannah R Kirk, Alexander Whitefield, Paul Röttger, Andrew Bean, Katerina Margatina, Juan Ciro, Rafael Mosquera,
Max Bartolo, Adina Williams, He He, et al. The prism alignment dataset: What participatory, representative and
individualised human feedback reveals about the subjective and multicultural alignment of large language models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:105236–105344, 2024.
Xinyu Li, Ruiyang Zhou, Zachary C Lipton, and Liu Leqi. Personalized language modeling from personalized human
feedback. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.05133, 1(3):4, 2024.
Thomas Zollo, Andrew Siah, Naimeng Ye, Li Li, and Hongseok Namkoong. Personalllm: Tailoring llms to individual
preferences. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 66949–66971, 2025.
Sriyash Poddar, Yanming Wan, Hamish Ivison, Abhishek Gupta, and Natasha Jaques. Personalizing reinforcement
learning from human feedback with variational preference learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37:52516–52544, 2024.
Bowen Jiang, Zhuoqun Hao, Young-Min Cho, Bryan Li, Yuan Yuan, Sihao Chen, Lyle Ungar, Camillo J Taylor, and
Dan Roth. Know me, respond to me: Benchmarking llms for dynamic user profiling and personalized responses at
scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14225, 2025.
Jing Xu, Megan Ung, Mojtaba Komeili, Kushal Arora, Y-Lan Boureau, and Jason Weston. Learning new skills after
deployment: Improving open-domain internet-driven dialogue with human feedback. In Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 13557–13572,
2023.
Visual Capitalist. Ranked: The most popular Generative AI tools in 2024. https://www.visualcapitalist.com/
ranked-the-most-popular-generative-ai-tools-in-2024/, Oct 2024.
Similarweb. Top websites ranking. https://www.similarweb.com/top-websites/, 2025a.
Business of Apps. Most popular apps (2024). https://www.businessofapps.com/data/most-popular-apps/,
2024.
Similarweb. Top android apps ranking. https://www.similarweb.com/top-apps/google/, 2025b. Filtered for
free apps in the US.
Similarweb. Top iphone apps ranking (free, in the us). https://www.similarweb.com/top-apps/apple/, 2024.
Filtered for free apps in the US.
Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich. Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems, pages 249–256, 1990.
Jakob Nielsen. How to conduct a heuristic evaluation. Nielsen Norman Group, 1(1):8, 1995.
Ben Caldwell, Michael Cooper, Loretta Guarino Reid, Gregg Vanderheiden, Wendy Chisholm, John Slatin, and Jason
White. Web content accessibility guidelines (wcag) 2.0. WWW Consortium (W3C), 290(1-34):5–12, 2008.
Remi Denton, Alex Hanna, Razvan Amironesei, Andrew Smart, Hilary Nicole, and Morgan Klaus Scheuerman.
Bringing the people back in: Contesting benchmark machine learning datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07399,
2020.
Mona Sloane, Emanuel Moss, Olaitan Awomolo, and Laura Forlano. Participation is not a design fix for machine
learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Opti-
mization, EAAMO ’22, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450394772.
doi:10.1145/3551624.3555285. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3551624.3555285.
Michael A. Madaio, Luke Stark, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Hanna Wallach. Co-designing checklists to understand
organizational challenges and opportunities around fairness in ai. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’20, page 1–14, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781450367080. doi:10.1145/3313831.3376445. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.
3376445.
23


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Marios Constantinides, Edyta Bogucka, Daniele Quercia, Susanna Kallio, and Mohammad Tahaei. Rai guidelines:
Method for generating responsible ai guidelines grounded in regulations and usable by (non-)technical roles.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 8(CSCW2), 2024. doi:10.1145/3686927.
K. J. Kevin Feng, David W. McDonald, and Amy X. Zhang. Levels of autonomy for ai agents, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2506.12469.
Mohammad Tahaei, Kami Vaniea, and Awais Rashid. Embedding privacy into design through software developers:
Challenges and solutions. IEEE Security & Privacy, 21(1):49–57, 2023b. doi:10.1109/MSEC.2022.3204364.
Beatrice Vincenzi, Simone Stumpf, Alex S. Taylor, and Yuri Nakao. Lay user involvement in developing human-centric
responsible ai systems: When and how? ACM J. Responsib. Comput., 1(2), June 2024. doi:10.1145/3652592. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3652592.
Anna Brown, Alexandra Chouldechova, Emily Putnam-Hornstein, Andrew Tobin, and Rhema Vaithianathan. Toward
algorithmic accountability in public services: A qualitative study of affected community perspectives on algorithmic
decision-making in child welfare services. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 1–12, 2019.
Saffron Huang, Divya Siddarth, Liane Lovitt, Thomas I. Liao, Esin Durmus, Alex Tamkin, and Deep Ganguli.
Collective constitutional ai: Aligning a language model with public input. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’24, page 1395–1417, New York, NY, USA,
2024. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9798400704505.
doi:10.1145/3630106.3658979.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3630106.3658979.
Abeba Birhane, William Isaac, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Madeleine Clare Elish, Iason Gabriel,
and Shakir Mohamed.
Power to the people? opportunities and challenges for participatory ai.
In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, 2022.
doi:10.1145/3551624.3555290.
Elizabeth Bondi, Lily Xu, Diana Acosta-Navas, and Jackson A. Killian. Envisioning communities: A participatory
approach towards ai for social good. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society,
AIES ’21, page 425–436, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450384735.
doi:10.1145/3461702.3462612. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3461702.3462612.
Kate Crawford. Atlas of AI: Power, politics, and the planetary costs of artificial intelligence. Yale University Press,
2021.
Fernando Delgado, Stephen Yang, Michael Madaio, and Qian Yang. The participatory turn in ai design: Theoretical
foundations and the current state of practice. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in
Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, EAAMO ’23, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9798400703812. doi:10.1145/3617694.3623261. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3617694.
3623261.
Eric Corbett, Remi Denton, and Sheena Erete. Power and public participation in ai. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pages 1–13, 2023.
Ned Cooper and Alexandra Zafiroglu. From fitting participation to forging relationships: The art of participatory ml. In
Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–9, 2024.
Sherry R Arnstein. A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of planners, 35(4):216–224,
1969.
Michael Feffer, Michael Skirpan, Zachary Lipton, and Hoda Heidari. From preference elicitation to participatory ml: A
critical survey & guidelines for future research. In Proceedings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society, AIES ’23, page 38–48, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9798400702310. doi:10.1145/3600211.3604661. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3600211.3604661.
Thoughtworks. Responsible Technology Playbook; Tools for the United Nations. Thoughtworks, 2023.
Virginia Eubanks. Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor. St. Martin’s, 2018.
Iason Gabriel and Geoff Keeling. A matter of principle? ai alignment as the fair treatment of claims. Philosophical
Studies, 182(7):1951–1973, 2025.
Nitesh Goyal, Ian D Kivlichan, Rachel Rosen, and Lucy Vasserman. Is your toxicity my toxicity? exploring the impact
of rater identity on toxicity annotation. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 6(CSCW2):1–28,
2022.
Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, and Mark Diaz. On releasing annotator-level labels and
information in datasets. In Proceedings of the joint 15th linguistic annotation workshop (LAW) and 3rd designing
meaning representations (DMR) workshop, pages 133–138, 2021.
24


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Pushkar Mishra, Charvi Rastogi, Stephen R. Pfohl, Alicia Parrish, Tian Huey Teh, Roma Patel, Mark Diaz, Ding Wang,
Michela Paganini, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Lora Aroyo, and Verena Rieser. Decoding safety feedback from diverse
raters: A data-driven lens on responsiveness to severity, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05609.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph,
Ben Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a laboratory for alignment. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00861, 2021.
Nithya Sambasivan, Erin Arnesen, Ben Hutchinson, Tulsee Doshi, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. Re-imagining
algorithmic fairness in india and beyond. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability,
and transparency, pages 315–328, 2021.
Aida Davani, Mark Diaz, Dylan Baker, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. D3code: Disentangling disagreements in data
across cultures on offensiveness detection and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 18511–18526, 2024.
Mohammad Tahaei, Daricia Wilkinson, Alisa Frik, Michael Muller, Ruba Abu-Salma, and Lauren Wilcox. Surveys
considered harmful? reflecting on the use of surveys in ai research, development, and governance. Proceedings of the
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2024.
A
Benchmark Taxonomy of GenAI Products and Features
A.1
Dimensions for Taxonomy and Usability Inspection
• Entry point/When feedback is requested
• Text inviting feedback at entry point (if any)
– Including hover-over text
• What it is soliciting feedback about (the whole feature, or some of its parts)
• Type of feedback (e.g. rating only (binary or scale), preset options, free text)
• List of all preset options for negative feedback (if applicable)
– Is Safety/Harm included in the options? If so, is it at the top level?
– Is Bias included in the options? If so, is it at the top level?
– Is Accuracy included in the options? If so, is it at the top level?
• Whether detailed feedback (presets and/or free-text) is optional
• Confirmation or thank-you text after positive feedback is submitted (if any)
• Confirmation or thank-you text after negative feedback is submitted (if any)
• Persistent signal that feedback has been submitted (if any)
• Whether feedback can be unsent and/or edited
• Whether there is a link or pop-up to learn more about the feedback process
• Whether a login is required to submit feedback
We recorded screenshots of entry points, forms, and messages for each product to accompany the taxonomy. We
also documented information about the product the feedback was solicited for, such as what it does (e.g., generates
text/image/video, recommends products), whether it requires a login, and whether the user has a choice about interacting
with the feature, as well as the name and sector of the company providing the product.
A.2
GenAI Products Reviewed
The lists below include all products reviewed in the benchmark taxonomy. * indicates the products we selected for the
Heuristic Evaluation.
Flagship GenAI tools:
• ChatGPT/DALL-E*
• Claude*
• Duck.ai (anonymous portal to other tools)
25


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
• Google Gemini*
• Grok
• Meta AI* (also used for WhatsApp search and Instagram search)
• Microsoft Copilot
• NightCafe
• Perplexity
• Poe
GenAI features in e-commerce products/services:
• Amazon Rufus*
• BuySmart AI
• Google Shopping AI Overview*
• Google Shopping Try-On Models*
• Shop App AI (for Shopify)*
GenAI features in products from other sectors:
• Bing Copilot Answers (search-based feature)
• Bing search summaries (not part of Copilot Answers)
• DuckDuckGo Assist
• Google Search AI Overview
• MacOS Preview Writing Tools (desktop app)
• Reddit Answers
• Snapchat My AI
• WhatsApp Sticker Create
• Yahoo News Takeaways
• Yahoo Search summaries
• Yandex/Dzen Search summaries
eBay’s GenAI features:
• Chat with eBay.ai*
• eBay AI Description Generator*
• eBay Shop the Look*
• Three eBay features that were not yet public (one seller-side and two buyer-side, of which one buyer-side
feature* was included in the Heuristic Evaluation)
Did not review, as they did not have dedicated feedback mechanisms as of March 2025:
• Amazon Customers Say
• DeepAI
• eBay Background Generator
• Poshmark Smart List AI
• Snapchat AI Snaps/AI Lenses/AI Memories
• Tripadvisor AI
• Walmart Customer Service
• Yelp AI Assistant
26


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
B
Template for Heuristic Evaluation
Instructions:
Welcome! Because you’re considered an expert in your field, you’re invited to participate in a heuristic evaluation
of the user interface designs and flows that allow users to provide feedback about GenAI systems’ outputs.
What is Heuristic Evaluation? A heuristic evaluation is a method for identifying design problems in a user
interface. Evaluators judge the design against a set of guidelines (called heuristics) that make systems easy to use.
Why are user feedback features important? User feedback is the communication channel between the users, the
product, and the product team. For AI products, user feedback and control are critical to improving the underlying
AI model’s output and user experience. When users have the opportunity to offer feedback, they can play a direct
role in personalizing their experiences and maximizing the benefit the product brings to them. When users have
the right level of control over the system, they’re more likely to trust it.
Task: Fill out all empty rows and columns. It will take about 20 minutes per tab.
1. Assume that you’re the user of the AI system and you want to provide positive or negative feedback about
this AI system.
2. Watch video recordings of the interactions with the user feedback feature for both Web and Mobile
versions. You can re-watch, pause and rewind the videos. Web: [link] Mobile:[link]
3. Record your Job role, the Date of evaluation, Device, and Operating System on which the user
feedback was tested.
4. Read the description of each Heuristic/Criterion.
5. Evaluate the user feedback feature by answering all Guiding Questions; note that it is not an exhaustive
list; feel free to share any additional thoughts. In the Rating column, provide an overall assessment of
how well the Heuristic is implemented in the user feedback feature.
6. (most important) Provide comments about identified Issues, note Positive aspects, and suggest Recom-
mendations for improvement. Be as specific as you can.
Table 1 demonstrates the template format provided to the evaluators, and Table 2 gives the full list of heuristics and
guiding questions.
Table 1: Template for heuristic evaluation, with heuristic, guiding questions, and space to record rating and written
evaluation. Only the first 2 heuristics are included in this format for illustrative purposes. The full list of heuristics is in
Table 2.
Heuristic/Criterion
Guiding Questions
Rating
Issues Positive
aspects
Recommen-
dations
Entry Point:
The entry
point should be obvious and
intuitive. Users should easily
understand where to start if
they want to leave feedback
regarding the AI-generated
response.
• Is it immediately obvious
that the user can leave feed-
back about the AI-generated
response?
• How easy or difficult is it
to discover where to start to
leave feedback about the AI-
generated response?
[Very
well;
Some-
what well;
Some-
what
poorly;
Very
poorly]
Continued on next page
27


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Table 1 – continued from previous page
Heuristic/Criterion
Guiding Questions
Rating
Issues Positive
aspects
Recommen-
dations
Navigation:
It should be
easy to navigate the system
to leave feedback about the
AI-generated response. In-
formation should appear in
a natural and logical order.
• Does it take a lot of effort or
time to leave feedback about
the AI-generated response?
• Is information given at the
points in the flow when it is
most relevant to the user’s
decision-making?
• Is it obvious which form
fields
are
optional
and
which ones are required?
• Is the interface visually ap-
pealing and easy to navi-
gate?
[Very
well;
Some-
what well;
Some-
what
poorly;
Very
poorly]
End of table
Table 2: Description of heuristics and related guiding questions used in the heuristic evaluation template.
Heuristic/Criterion
Guiding Questions
Entry Point: The entry point should
be obvious and intuitive.
Users
should easily understand where to
start if they want to leave feedback
regarding the AI-generated response.
• Is it immediately obvious that the user can leave feedback about the
AI-generated response?
• How easy or difficult is it to discover where to start to leave feedback
about the AI-generated response?
Navigation: It should be easy to nav-
igate the system to leave feedback
about the AI-generated response. In-
formation should appear in a natural
and logical order.
• Does it take a lot of effort or time to leave feedback about the AI-
generated response?
• Is information given at the points in the flow when it is most relevant to
the user’s decision-making?
• Is it obvious which form fields are optional and which ones are required?
• Is the interface visually appealing and easy to navigate?
Clarity
of
the
Word-
ing/Information:
The
design
should speak the users’ language.
Use words, phrases, and concepts
familiar to the user, rather than
internal jargon.
• Will users be familiar with the terminology used by the feedback feature?
(If not, what words may be confusing?)
• Is the information given at each step sufficient?
• If there are quick-answer response options (pills, checkboxes, etc.), are
they clear, relevant, and helpful to have?
Continued on next page
28


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Table 2 – continued from previous page
Heuristic/Criterion
Guiding Questions
Clarity of the Process: Users should
understand the consequences of their
actions when they decide to pro-
vide feedback about AI-generated re-
sponses.
• Is it clear what information will be sent alongside the user’s responses in
the feedback form? (e.g. user ID, personal info such as email address
or name, entire chat, only the AI-generated response that the user is
providing feedback for, query + the response, metadata (such as time
stamp, browser version, device model), etc.)
• Is it clear who will have access to the provided feedback? For example,
would other users, buyers, or sellers be notified about the feedback? Will
employees of the company that deployed the AI feature or the company
that trained the model get access to the feedback? Will law enforcement
be notified about any types of negative experiences reported?
User Value and Motivation: The
benefit of providing feedback should
be clear and specific. If it is not clear
and specific, users may not under-
stand why they should give feedback,
they might avoid giving feedback, or
if they can’t avoid it, they could give
meaningless responses, or feedback
that ends up being harmful to the prod-
uct or community.
• Is it clear what will happen if the user submits the feedback? For example,
will future AI-generated responses change for the specific user (i.e. they
will not see similar responses anymore or recommendations will be more
customized)? Will they change for all users (e.g. it will be used in re-
training or fine-tuning of the model in general)? Will anyone (e.g. other
users, buyers, sellers) be penalized if users report negative experiences
with the AI-generated responses?
• Is the tone of the communication friendly, respectful, and inviting? Will
the user feel encouraged to submit feedback?
• Does the flow include a thank you message to make users feel that their
feedback is appreciated?
Help and Additional Information:
It’s best if the system doesn’t need
any additional explanation. However,
it may be necessary to provide doc-
umentation to help users understand
how to complete their tasks.
• Is help or additional information easy to find?
• Is help or additional information provided in context right at the moment
when the user requires it? (For example, via hover-over text, in-situ
explanations, ""Learn more"" links.)
Unnecessary Information: While in-
terfaces should contain sufficient in-
formation, they also should not con-
tain information that is irrelevant or
rarely needed (at least within the main
flow). Every extra unit of information
in an interface competes with the rel-
evant units of information and dimin-
ishes their relative visibility.
• Is the visual design and content focused on the essentials?
• Have all distracting, unnecessary elements been removed?
Consistency: The experience should
be consistent across device types and
interaction channels. Users should
not have to wonder whether different
words, situations, or actions mean the
same thing. The feature should follow
platform and industry conventions.
• Are words and visual elements used consistently throughout the flow?
• Are words and visual elements used consistently across different types of
devices or different channels (websites vs. mobile apps), when feasible?
• Does the design follow industry conventions?
Continued on next page
29


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Table 2 – continued from previous page
Heuristic/Criterion
Guiding Questions
User Control and Freedom: Users
often perform actions by mistake, or
open menus just to explore what’s
there when looking for something.
They need a clearly marked ""emer-
gency exit"" to leave an unwanted ac-
tion, without having to go through an
extended process.
• Does the design allow users to go back a step in the process?
• Are “exit” options easily discoverable? Is it clear how to cancel the
action if the user decides not to submit the feedback?
• Are Undo and Redo supported?
Visibility of System Status: The
design should always keep users
informed about what is going on,
through appropriate signals from the
system within a reasonable amount of
time.
• Does the design clearly communicate its state? (For example, whether
the feedback has been submitted or what rating was selected?)
• Do signals from the system appear immediately after user actions? Are
signals persistent (i.e. do they stay on the screen or disappear)?
Responsible AI: The feedback form
should encourage feedback not only
about the relevance and factual accu-
racy of the response, but also other
aspects of responsible and ethical AI.
• Does the interface explicitly offer users a means to provide feedback
about ethical aspects of the AI-generated response (e.g. bias, offensive
content, or other harms)?
Overall Assessment: Users should
feel overall satisfaction after their ex-
perience of providing feedback.
• Overall, how satisfied do you think an average user would be with this
experience?
• Is there anything in this experience that really stands out as an example
of good usability?
• Is there anything in this experience that really stands out as an example
of poor usability?
End of table
30


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
C
Model User Feedback Template and Guidelines
Figures 2–10 show the final set of guidelines for user feedback on GenAI tools and features, incorporating findings and
recommendations from all stages of the project.
These guidelines are available in alternative formats in the Supplementary Materials:
• A text-only version of the guidelines and text for the template, organized suitably for screenreaders, in the file
Text-Only Version of Guidelines and Template.
• An single image PDF of the full guidelines and template in color, in the file Full-Image Version of Guidelines
and Template.
31


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 2: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 1): Purpose of guidelines and skeleton for feedback form.
32


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 3: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 2): Core principles and introduction to entry points.
33


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 4: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 3): Entry points for simple features.
34


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 5: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 4): Entry points for complex features.
35


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 6: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 5): Structure pointers for feedback form and for negative and positive
feedback flows.
36


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 7: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 6): Negative feedback forms for different types of features.
37


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 8: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 7): Positive feedback forms for different types of features.
38


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 9: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 8): Detailed pointers for preset options, free-text responses, and privacy
disclaimers.
39


Designing the Future of User Feedback for Generative AI
Figure 10: GenAI Feedback Guidelines (Part 9): Thank-you screens and post-feedback signals.
40
