FROM TAPPING TO HOPPING: AUGMENTING MOBILE
GUI AGENTS WITH APP-NATIVE DEEPLINKS
Yuchen Sun1,∗
Chenglin Cai2,∗
Gongjie Zhang2,∗
Tianyu Xia2
Quyu Kong2
Panrong Tong2
Zhengwen Zeng2
Long Chen2
Steven Hoi2
Chongyang Zhang1,#
Yue Wang2,#
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
∗Equal contribution.
#Corresponding authors.
sunny zhang@sjtu.edu.cn
wangyue2714@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Mobile GUI agents complete tasks using GUI actions like taps and swipes. These
actions are broadly applicable across applications, but reaching a task-relevant
screen can require many intermediate navigation steps, lengthening trajectories
and creating more opportunities for error. Fortunately, many Android applications
expose deeplinks—external entry points to specific in-app screens—that provide
a higher-level navigation interface. A single deeplink call can replace a sequence
of screen-by-screen GUI actions. We therefore introduce hybrid interaction, using
deeplinks for direct navigation and GUI actions for other on-screen operations and
fallback. To enable this, we discover candidate deeplinks through static analysis,
validate them on real devices, and describe their observed landing screens. This
process creates a verified and grounded deeplink catalog that pairs each working
deeplink with a description of its landing screen. Using this catalog, we introduce
GUI-Hopper, a deeplink-augmented GUI agent that learns when to use a deeplink
and when to rely on GUI actions. On MobileWorld, GUI-Hopper achieves higher
task success with fewer steps than its GUI-only counterpart; its gains persist even
without deeplinks at inference. On MobileWorld-Real, it also improves task suc-
cess in commercial applications on real devices, further demonstrating the benefits
of hybrid interaction.
1
INTRODUCTION
Mobile
GUI
agents
have
advanced
rapidly
with
multimodal
large
language
models
(MLLMs) (Zhang et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026).
Most operate exclusively
through GUI actions: the agent observes the current screen and acts using taps, swipes, etc. This in-
teraction method is native to mobile interfaces, broadly applicable, requires no application-specific
API, and supports fine-grained control. Yet relying on GUI actions means that every navigation
path must be completed screen by screen. To reach a screen several GUI steps away, a GUI agent
must interact with every intermediate screen before the relevant controls become available. Each
intermediate screen lengthens the trajectory and introduces another opportunity for error.
This
raises a practical question: must an agent use GUI actions for every navigation step?
Deeplinks offer an alternative way to navigate. Android applications expose them as external entry
points to specific in-app screens (Google, 2026a). As illustrated by the flight-search example in
Figure 1, a single deeplink call can supply the origin, destination, and travel dates and open the
corresponding results screen directly. Beyond reducing navigation steps, a deeplink catalog gives the
agent a structured, application-level view of directly reachable destinations and the parameters they
accept—information not visible in the current screenshot. Deeplinks and GUI actions therefore play
complementary roles: deeplinks provide higher-level navigation, whereas GUI actions support fine-
grained on-screen operations and fallback. We call their joint use within a task hybrid interaction.
Before an agent can use deeplinks, it must know which ones work and where they lead. We begin
by applying existing static-analysis techniques to extract candidate deeplinks (Zhao et al., 2026).
1
arXiv:2609.30887v1  [cs.AI]  25 Sep 2026


Must an agent use GUI actions for every navigation step?
Task: find a concert in Beijing, fly there, book a hotel near the venue, and plan the route from the airport.
GUI-only agent — navigates screen by screen
Target 2: 
Find Airline
Target 3: 
Book Hotel
Target 4: 
Route Plan
2
3
4
7
6
9
13
15+ GUI steps — one screen at a time, and each step adds a chance of error
Wrong Step
GUI-Hopper — hybrid interaction: deeplinks + GUI
Target 2: 
Find Airline
Target 3:
Book Hotel
Target 4: 
Route Plan
Target 1: 
Find Concert
Any
Page
1
2
3
4
4 deeplinks + few GUI steps — direct hops into deep screens across apps 
verified & grounded deeplink catalog
…
deep screens known in advance
Deeplink
open_performance
Deeplink
flight_search
Deeplink
open_hotel
Deeplink
driving_route
Target 1: 
Find Concert
10
11
15
potential step
1
deeplink hop
screens in deeplink catalogs
irrelevant screens
task-relevant screens
task path
14
1
12
8
5
Figure 1: From GUI-only to hybrid interaction. For a long-horizon mobile task spanning mul-
tiple applications, a GUI-only agent navigates screen by screen, requiring 15+ GUI steps (left).
GUI-Hopper uses verified deeplinks to reach task-relevant screens directly and GUI actions for the
remaining interaction (right), shortening the trajectory and reducing opportunities for error.
However, these candidates are not yet suitable for use as agent actions: some are stale or redundant,
some require parameter values that are not specified in their declarations, and their behavior may
depend on runtime context. Moreover, a deeplink URI alone rarely conveys what the deeplink does
or where it leads. To resolve this ambiguity, we develop an automated pipeline that searches for valid
parameter values when needed and directly executes each candidate on real devices. The pipeline
discards candidates that fail or do not lead to a meaningful screen and pairs each retained deeplink
with a language description of its observed landing screen. Together, these steps transform raw
candidates into a verified and grounded deeplink catalog.
A reliable catalog alone is not enough: an agent must still determine whether a given deeplink will
help with the current task. We therefore introduce GUI-Hopper, a deeplink-augmented GUI agent
trained to use a deeplink when it is useful and otherwise rely on GUI control. To teach this decision,
negative augmentation exposes GUI-Hopper to cases in which the matching deeplink is withheld,
only irrelevant deeplinks are provided, or an invocation fails at runtime. We then optimize GUI-
Hopper through online reinforcement learning to encourage correct deeplink use and efficient task
completion. At inference, the system retrieves deeplinks whose landing-screen descriptions match
the task, and GUI-Hopper decides whether to invoke one. After each invocation, the system checks
whether the expected screen has been reached. If no suitable deeplink is available or verification
fails, GUI-Hopper continues the task through ordinary GUI interaction.
We evaluate whether this combination improves task completion and interaction efficiency. On Mo-
bileWorld (Kong et al., 2026), GUI-Hopper completes more tasks with fewer interaction steps than
a matched GUI-only agent, and the advantage holds across the three model scales we train. GUI-
Hopper continues to outperform the GUI-only agent when evaluated without deeplinks, showing
that its gains persist beyond direct deeplink use. GUI-Hopper also performs well on real devices
in MobileWorld-Real (Zhou et al., 2026). Together, these results point to a paradigm shift: from
GUI-only mobile agents to agents that combine GUI control with deeplinks when they are available.
The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we introduce GUI-Hopper, which combines
deeplinks for higher-level navigation with GUI actions for fine-grained on-screen operations and
fallback. This allows the agent to reach task-relevant screens directly when suitable deeplinks are
2


available while retaining GUI control throughout the task. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to systematically integrate deeplinks into mobile GUI agents across catalog construction,
model training, and inference-time execution. Second, we develop an automatic deeplink mining
and grounding pipeline that discovers candidate deeplinks, tests them on real devices, and pairs each
verified deeplink with a description of its observed landing screen. Third, we train GUI-Hopper to
select deeplinks and return to GUI control when needed, using negative augmentation and reinforce-
ment learning with rewards for task success, deeplink use, and interaction efficiency. Experiments
show that GUI-Hopper improves task success and interaction efficiency, retains its gains when eval-
uated without deeplinks, and performs well on real devices.
2
RELATED WORK
Mobile GUI Agents.
Existing work on mobile GUI agents can be broadly divided into two cate-
gories. Framework-based approaches orchestrate off-the-shelf multimodal models through prompt-
ing, ranging from single-agent exploration to multi-agent collaboration with memory (Zhang et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024; 2025b). More recent approaches instead train native GUI models end to
end, scaling unified architectures across platforms through data flywheels and online reinforcement
learning (Qin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Zhou et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2026;
Yan et al., 2025; Cao et al., 2026). Recent benchmarks emphasize longer tasks, cross-application
workflows, and real-device interaction (Kong et al., 2026; Sui et al., 2026; Zhou et al., 2026), making
trajectory efficiency important alongside task success (Jang et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2025). Yet despite
these advances, agents in both categories still perform every navigation step through the GUI, screen
by screen—the inefficiency targeted by our work.
Tool-Augmented Mobile Agents.
Tool-augmented mobile agents complement GUI interaction
with tools that execute reusable action sequences or directly invoke functions within applications.
Academic approaches generally construct tools on the agent side, either by distilling reusable skills
from agent trajectories (Jiang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b) or by building tool libraries from
documentation and synthetic traces; several studies further train models to invoke these tools (Yang
et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2026; Xie et al., 2025). These agent-constructed tools can be brittle: trajectory-
derived skills may be tied to the UI versions on which their source trajectories were collected, while
synthesized tool libraries may not behave reliably in real applications. Industrial systems, by con-
trast, rely on platform interfaces such as Apple App Intents and Google App Actions that applica-
tion developers integrate directly (Apple Inc., 2024; Google, 2024). These interfaces are dependable
once integrated, but their coverage is limited by developer adoption. Deeplinks offer a third path
that avoids much of this trade-off. Because they are app-native, deeplinks can be reused without
requiring developers to implement a new agent-facing API. When mined systematically, they also
expose an application’s directly addressable pages. Recent work provides agents with manually
curated deeplinks at inference time (Zhao et al., 2026; Lychee Team, 2026). We go further by au-
tomatically mining and validating deeplinks on real devices, training the agent to choose between
deeplinks and GUI actions, and supporting inference with retrieval and landing-screen verification.
To our knowledge, no prior work addresses this full pipeline.
Deeplinks in the Android Ecosystem.
Android applications expose deeplinks as external entry
points to directly launch specific in-app screens (Google, 2026a). Research on deeplinks has ex-
amined their generation, use in software testing, and security. On the generation side, uLink and
Aladdin generate deeplinks for existing applications, motivated by the observation that many appli-
cations expose few developer-defined links (Azim et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2018). In software testing,
deeplinks improve the coverage of automated exploration by providing direct access to deeply nested
pages (Hu et al., 2024). Security studies have measured hijacking risks at scale and shown that the
verification machinery can itself be bypassed (Liu et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2020). Recent analyses
further report that production OEM assistants already invoke deeplinks to bypass screen-by-screen
UI navigation (Wu et al., 2025). Collectively, this literature establishes deeplinks as a mature mech-
anism in Android. It does not, however, study how a trained mobile agent can learn to combine
deeplinks with GUI actions.
3


(a) Deeplink Mining
(b) Training in a Hybrid Action Space
(c) Agent Harness
…
Deeplink Catalog
…
ctrip_flight_search_oneway
1. multi-hop task
2. deeplink dropout
3. wrong call injection
repair repair
withheld catalog entry
✓
landing matched
task
retrieval
LLM
GUI-Hopper
GUI
deeplink
vs
landing verification
✓
✕
fall back to GUI
deeplink call
successful deeplink call
GUI step
failed deeplink call
fired & verified
device probe
static analysis
depart_city_code
arrive_city_code
depart_date
Command
am start -W 
-a …MULTI_SEARCH 
--ei type 3
-e depart_citycode  
-e arrive_citycode
-e depart_date
Parameters
exported check
Harness (verification)
expected landing
vs
actual landing
✓
c
✕
c
partial credit
same task 
len = 7, success
inject
Hybrid trajectory synthesis
Online Reinforcement Learning
R = 0.3
Intents captured in use update the catalog
Verification Reward
Efficiency Reward
✕
landing mismatched
len = 4, success
R = 0.9
len = 5, failed
R = 0
Figure 2: Overview of our approach. (a) A mining pipeline verifies deeplinks on real devices and
builds a grounded catalog. (b) Hybrid trajectory synthesis and online reinforcement learning train
GUI-Hopper in the hybrid action space. (c) At inference, the harness retrieves task-specific deeplink
candidates and checks whether each call reaches its expected Activity, with GUI fallback on failure.
3
METHOD
GUI-Hopper is a mobile agent trained to use deeplink actions alongside GUI control. GUI-Hopper
is built on three key components (Figure 2): a mining pipeline that turns app-provided deeplinks
into a verified and grounded catalog (Section 3.2), a hybrid-action training strategy that teaches the
model when to invoke a deeplink and when to continue with GUI actions (Section 3.3), and an agent
harness for verified deeplink use on real phones (Section 3.4).
3.1
PRELIMINARIES
Deeplinks in Android.
Android applications organize user-facing screens into Activities. An Ac-
tivity is launched through an Intent, a system message that identifies the target component and
carries invocation parameters. In AndroidManifest.xml, an application can associate URI
patterns with Activities that external callers may open. Android resolves an Intent carrying the URI
to an Activity that can handle it and launches that Activity; we refer to this URI-based entry point
as a deeplink (Google, 2026b). Because a raw URI rarely reveals its landing screen, we expose each
deeplink to the model as a tool with a name, a landing-screen description, and parameter definitions.
Section 3.2 describes how these fields are constructed. In the formulation below, a deeplink action
invokes one such catalog entry with concrete parameters.
Task formulation.
We model mobile interaction as a partially observable Markov decision pro-
cess (Kaelbling et al., 1998) with environment states st ∈S, observations ot ∈O, actions at ∈A,
and transition dynamics T (st+1 | st, at). The action space is hybrid: A = AGUI ∪ADL. Here,
AGUI contains atomic screen operations such as tapping, swiping, and typing. Each deeplink ac-
tion is a pair (d, x), where d is a catalog entry supplied for the current task and x assigns concrete
values to its parameters. At step t, the agent receives an observation ot = (vt, ft), where vt is the
current screenshot and ft is the harness’s feedback after the preceding action. GUI actions produce
no structured feedback. For a deeplink action, ft reports whether the invocation succeeded and
whether the observed landing Activity matches the expected Activity recorded in the catalog. The
policy chooses at = πθ(I, ot, Ht) from the task instruction I, the current observation ot, and the
4


recent interaction history Ht = (ot−h, at−h, . . . , ot−1, at−1). We optimize the policy parameters to
maximize the expected trajectory reward J(θ) = Eτ∼πθ[R(τ)], with R defined in Section 3.3.
3.2
DEEPLINK MINING AND DESCRIPTION
Android applications already expose deeplink entry points, but their declarations alone do not make
these entries usable as agent actions. Building the catalog requires two steps: verifying which
candidates work on a device and representing each verified entry with a landing-screen description
and parameter definitions. Static analysis provides initial candidates but cannot determine whether
a candidate works or where it lands. This limitation is especially important for entries that route to
different screens depending on parameter values not specified in their declarations. We therefore test
candidates on real devices and use the observed results to verify and describe each retained entry.
Mining pipeline.
The pipeline (Figure 2(a)) begins by extracting candidate entries from manifest
declarations and shortcut definitions (Google, 2026b;c) through static analysis of the application
package. We first filter out candidates whose target components are not exported and therefore can-
not be invoked externally. For the remaining candidates, we use a read-only package-manager query
to check whether they resolve to installed components, without launching the application or invoking
a model. Finally, we test each resolvable candidate on a real device and retain only those that open a
meaningful screen. For parameterized entries, we test candidate values and retain a parameter only
if changing its value visibly changes the resulting screen. After verification, we consolidate dupli-
cate entries and exclude those pointing to transient targets to form the final catalog. Across the 26
commercial applications selected for MobileWorld-Real evaluation, the resulting catalog contains
1,251 verified entries.
Describing deeplinks for agent use.
For each verified deeplink, we create a catalog entry de-
scribing where it leads and how to invoke it. Each entry specifies a tool name, a description of the
observed landing screen, and parameter definitions with formats and example values. Since a screen
often supports multiple functions, we describe the landing screen rather than a single function. We
also specify what remains to be done after landing, making clear that reaching the screen does not
necessarily mean that the task is complete. Together, these details help a mobile agent select a task-
relevant deeplink and supply appropriate parameter values. To enable the harness to execute the call
and verify its landing, each entry also stores an invocation template and the expected landing Activ-
ity. The agent harness fills this template with the selected parameter values to construct the call, then
compares the observed Activity with the expected one. Appendix B presents the complete catalog
entry format and prompt format, while Appendix A provides implementation details and statistics.
3.3
TRAINING IN A HYBRID ACTION SPACE
Training in a hybrid action space requires more than learning the syntax of a deeplink call. The
model must decide whether to invoke a deeplink or continue with GUI actions as the available
deeplink set varies, and it must recover when a call fails. We first use hybrid trajectory synthesis and
negative augmentation to teach selection and recovery. We then apply online reinforcement learning
to refine these behaviors.
Hybrid trajectory synthesis.
We synthesize training trajectories from tasks constructed around
the mined catalog (Figure 2(b)). They cover both tasks that chain multiple deeplink calls and tasks
that require GUI actions after a deeplink call, demonstrating how the two action types can be com-
bined. Because an unsuitable deeplink may take the agent directly to an unrelated screen, our neg-
ative augmentation targets both prevention and recovery. To prevent incorrect calls, we introduce
deeplink dropout: we sample successful deeplink trajectories and collect GUI-only trajectories for
the same tasks, supplying only task-irrelevant deeplinks in the prompt. These trajectories demon-
strate how to fall back on GUI actions when retrieval provides no useful deeplinks. To train recovery,
we apply wrong-call injection during trajectory generation. We deliberately invoke an unsuitable
deeplink and retain the subsequent sequence in which the agent recognizes that the landing screen
is irrelevant to the task, recovers from the error, and resumes the task. Together, these trajectories
teach the agent to use suitable deeplinks, rely on GUI actions when none are suitable, and recover
from incorrect calls.
5


Online reinforcement learning.
The synthesized trajectories teach the model the basic decision
pattern, while online interaction provides direct feedback on whether its deeplink choices reach the
expected destination and contribute to successful, efficient task completion. We therefore further
optimize GUI-Hopper with online reinforcement learning using both call-level and trajectory-level
feedback. Each catalog entry records its verified landing Activity. After execution, the feedback ft
reports whether the invocation succeeded and whether the observed Activity matches the expected
one (Section 3.1), providing a call-level verification signal. At the trajectory level, s(τ) records task
success, while |τ| counts the number of interaction steps and provides the basis for the efficiency
term. We derive the trajectory reward from these quantities:
R(τ) = s(τ)
 1 + α c(τ) + β e(τ)

,
(1)
where s(τ) ∈{0, 1} indicates whether the task is completed. The call score c(τ) evaluates each
task-relevant deeplink, assigning full credit when it is invoked and reaches its expected landing,
partial credit when it is invoked but fails the landing check, and zero when it is not invoked. The
efficiency score e(τ) = max(0, 1 −|τ|/Sref) is zero for trajectories at or above the reference
length Sref and increases linearly as trajectories become shorter. Because s(τ) gates the entire
reward, a failed trajectory receives zero reward regardless of its deeplink calls or length. Among
successful trajectories, the reward increases with the call score and with reductions in length below
Sref. We compute advantages with the group relative policy optimization (GRPO) estimator (Shao
et al., 2024). All trajectories within a GRPO group receive the same deeplink candidate set, so their
relative advantages are computed under the same action space. Candidate sets vary across groups to
expose the model to different deeplink availability without mixing conditions within a group.
3.4
AGENT HARNESS
The mining pipeline in Section 3.2 produces a verified and grounded deeplink catalog, while the
training strategy in Section 3.3 teaches the model to choose between deeplink and GUI actions.
To use the catalog and trained model together on real phones, the agent harness retrieves task-
specific deeplinks, executes and verifies deeplinks with GUI fallback, and captures parameter values
observed during use (Figure 2(c)).
Task-level retrieval.
Exposing the full catalog at every step would consume substantial context
and present the model with a large choice set. We therefore construct a task-specific candidate set
before execution. The model decomposes the task into ordered navigation goals and identifies the
application associated with each goal. For each goal, the harness restricts the candidate pool to that
application and ranks the entries using semantic and lexical matching. It then merges the per-goal
rankings and returns at most 10 deeplinks. The agent uses this compact candidate set throughout the
task instead of the full catalog.
Landing verification and fallback.
A deeplink is invoked through a system command, whose
return status alone does not establish whether the intended screen was reached. With incorrect
parameter values, the application may open an unexpected screen without reporting an error. Our
harness therefore checks whether the call executed successfully and whether the observed landing
Activity matches the expected one recorded in the catalog. It returns both results as the feedback ft
defined in Section 3.1. If either check fails, the next observation makes the failure explicit, allowing
the agent to recover through GUI actions rather than continue as though the deeplink had succeeded.
Deeplink parameter capture during use.
Deeplink parameters such as dates, locations, and item
identifiers allow later calls to reuse information from a user’s interaction history. During ordinary
app use, the harness observes the Intents issued by the application, extracts reusable parameter
values, and associates them with the corresponding catalog entries. The agent can then invoke these
entries with values observed from that user, for example to reopen the page for a previously booked
hotel or retrieve a past order by its identifier.
Together, the three components implement the deeplink-specific parts of the formulation in Sec-
tion 3.1: retrieval constructs a task-specific candidate set from ADL, verification produces ft, and
parameter capture adds observed values x for later calls (d, x). Additional implementation details
are provided in Appendix D.
6


Table 1: Experiment results on MobileWorld. GUI-Hopper improves success and efficiency over
GUI-only training across three model scales. Its success-rate gains persist under GUI-only evalua-
tion.
Model
Eval. with
deeplink
SR (%) ↑
Avg. length (steps) ↓
Success-only
All
General-purpose VLMs
Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026)
×
44.4
18.2
28.5
Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google DeepMind, 2026)
×
58.1
21.1
25.6
GPT-5.6-Sol (OpenAI, 2026)
×
70.1
21.9
26.5
Seed-2.0-Pro (ByteDance Seed, 2026a)
×
63.3
21.3
26.9
Specialized GUI Models
GUI-Owl-1.5-4B-Instruct (Xu et al., 2026)
×
25.1
16.1
28.4
GELab-Zero-4B (Yan et al., 2025)
×
16.0
14.2
29.9
PhoneBuddy-4B (Tang et al., 2026)
×
23.1
12.1
27.8
ForgeOwl-8B (Liu et al., 2026)
×
41.3
16.8
28.2
AutoGLM-Phone-9B (Liu et al., 2024)
×
15.0
18.6
35.0
UI-TARS-1.5-7B (ByteDance Seed, 2025)
×
8.9
13.1
28.4
MAI-UI-8B (Zhou et al., 2025)
×
27.6
17.8
36.8
UI-Venus-1.5-30B-A3B (Gao et al., 2026)
×
19.9
12.3
31.0
UI-Venus-2-9B (Venus Team et al., 2026)
×
68.1
19.9
24.7
Qwen3.5-based models
Qwen3.5-4B
×
15.7
12.4
32.9
+ GUI training
×
52.7
19.2
26.6
+ Hybrid training (ours)
×
53.0
18.9
23.5
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
60.1
17.5
20.9
Qwen3.5-9B
×
20.8
16.5
30.2
+ GUI training
×
54.4
19.4
25.7
+ Hybrid training (ours)
×
56.7
19.1
23.1
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
63.5
17.5
21.8
Qwen3.5-35B-A3B
×
17.7
13.0
27.5
+ GUI training
×
57.8
19.2
25.2
+ Hybrid training (ours)
×
61.8
19.0
24.3
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
64.1
16.7
21.0
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
SETUP
Benchmarks and metrics.
We evaluate GUI-Hopper on MobileWorld (Kong et al., 2026) and
MobileWorld-Real (Zhou et al., 2026). MobileWorld provides a simulated Android environment
with 13 built-in applications, where we evaluate all 117 tasks. We evaluate each MobileWorld task
three times per setting and compute success rate over all 351 task executions. For MobileWorld-
Real, we select 26 frequently used applications from the full benchmark and apply the proposed
automated pipeline to mine their deeplinks. We then select 119 tasks involving these applications
from the full benchmark for evaluation. For both benchmarks, we report task success rate and the
average number of interaction steps for successful trajectories and for all trajectories.
Training settings.
For MobileWorld, we use Qwen3.5 (Qwen Team, 2026a) models at three
scales: 4B, 9B, and 35B-A3B. At each scale, we compare the base model, an agent trained with
GUI actions alone, and GUI-Hopper. The two trained agents use paired trajectories from the same
tasks and otherwise follow identical training configurations; they differ only in whether deeplink ac-
tions and their associated feedback are available. We perform supervised fine-tuning for six epochs
with a peak learning rate of 3×10−6. After a warmup over the first 5% of training steps, the learning
rate follows a cosine schedule and decays to 1×10−7. We use a global batch size of 64, a microbatch
size of 1, and a context length of 28,672 tokens. Online reinforcement learning uses a group size of
8, a rollout temperature of 1.0, and a constant learning rate of 1 × 10−6, with α = 0.15, β = 0.10,
and Sref = 25. Appendix C provides the complete training configuration.
7


Table 2: Experiment results on MobileWorld-Real, a real-device mobile GUI agent benchmark.
GUI-Hopper improves success and efficiency over GUI-only training on physical devices.
Model
Eval. with
deeplink
SR (%) ↑
Avg. length (steps) ↓
Success-only
All
General-purpose VLMs
Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026)
×
75.0
21.8
25.9
Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google DeepMind, 2026)
×
96.9
14.9
15.6
GPT-5.6-Sol (OpenAI, 2026)
×
96.6
21.2
21.7
Kimi K2.6 (Moonshot AI, 2026)
×
68.9
19.8
28.6
Qwen3.7-Plus (Qwen Team, 2026b)
×
74.7
20.0
27.1
Seed-2.1-Pro (ByteDance Seed, 2026b)
×
89.6
20.2
22.8
Specialized GUI Models
GELab-Zero-4B (Yan et al., 2025)
×
34.1
20.5
35.3
GUI-Owl-1.5-32B-Instruct (Xu et al., 2026)
×
10.0
23.7
40.4
UI-Venus-1.5-30B-A3B (Gao et al., 2026)
×
43.8
11.3
31.9
UI-Venus-2-9B (Venus Team et al., 2026)
×
84.2
17.7
22.4
Qwen-UI-Agent-27B (Zhou et al., 2026)
×
92.0
16.5
18.1
Qwen3.5-based models
Qwen3.5-4B
×
21.1
13.7
33.4
+ GUI training
×
70.2
17.6
26.5
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
84.0
16.7
20.4
Qwen3.5-9B
×
18.9
14.4
30.6
+ GUI training
×
77.1
17.4
24.2
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
86.6
16.6
20.4
Qwen3.5-35B-A3B
×
39.5
12.8
32.1
+ GUI training
×
79.2
17.3
23.7
+ Hybrid training (ours)
✓
89.1
15.7
18.2
Construction of deeplink catalogs.
We construct the deeplink catalogs using the mining, verifi-
cation, and grounding pipeline described in Section 3.2. The pipeline yields 34 entries for Mobile-
World’s built-in applications and 1,251 entries for the 26 selected MobileWorld-Real applications.
At inference, we retrieve up to 10 candidate deeplinks from the catalog based on the current task and
provide them to GUI-Hopper. In the main comparisons, the base model and GUI-only agent receive
no deeplink candidates and operate solely in AGUI.
4.2
MAIN RESULTS
4.2.1
MOBILEWORLD
Table 1 compares the base model, the GUI-only agent, and GUI-Hopper across three model scales.
Both trained agents substantially improve over their corresponding base models. Across all three
model scales, GUI-Hopper with access to deeplinks consistently achieves higher success rates than
the GUI-only agent using GUI actions alone. It reduces average steps across all trajectories by
15.26–21.30%, with shorter successful trajectories at every scale. Verified deeplinks can take the
agent directly to task-relevant screens, bypassing lengthy GUI navigation and reducing opportunities
for navigation errors in long-horizon tasks.
Even when evaluated with GUI actions alone, GUI-Hopper’s hybrid-SFT checkpoints achieve higher
success rates than the GUI-only agent across all three model scales. GUI-Hopper also completes
tasks in fewer GUI steps than the GUI-only agent. Together, these results show that the hybrid-
trained model retains effective GUI ability: its gains are not confined to executions that can use
direct navigation shortcuts. Appendix E.1 provides a visualization of the successful-trajectory length
distributions at 9B.
One possible explanation is that hybrid-action training encourages the model to break tasks into
intermediate goals and identify the screens needed to achieve them. This pattern, learned with
hybrid interactions, may also generalize to mobile use with solely GUI actions, helping the agent
avoid unnecessary navigation. An illustrative GUI-only case is provided in the appendix (Figure 6).
8


4.2.2
MOBILEWORLD-REAL
We deploy the complete pipeline on MobileWorld-Real to verify whether hybrid interaction gener-
alizes to commercial applications running on physical devices. As summarized in Table 2, GUI-
Hopper consistently outperforms the GUI-only agent in both task completion and trajectory effi-
ciency, confirming that the efficiency advantages of deeplink-guided navigation effectively translate
from simulation to complex real-world mobile environments.
4.3
ABLATIONS
4.3.1
CONTRIBUTION OF TRAINING STAGES Table 3: Training-stage ablation on Qwen3.5-
4B. Online RL further improves success and ef-
ficiency after hybrid SFT.
Stage
SR (%) ↑
Length ↓
Base (GUI)
15.7
32.9
+ Hybrid SFT
57.8
22.5
+ Online RL
60.1
20.9
Trained variants use hybrid evaluation. Length: average
steps over all trajectories.
We examine the contribution of the training
stages (Table 3).
Both the hybrid-SFT model
and its online-RL refinement use Deeplink-Ten
at evaluation. We include the base model evalu-
ated with GUI actions as a reference.
Online reinforcement learning increases success
rate from 57.83% to 60.11%, while reducing the
average number of steps across all trajectories
from 22.52 to 20.91. With the deeplink supply unchanged, these gains suggest that online feedback
helps the agent make better use of the hybrid action space learned during supervised training.
4.3.2
EFFECT OF DEEPLINK SUPPLY
Table 4: Deeplink supply on MobileWorld. Task-
matched deeplinks improve general VLM perfor-
mance even without hybrid training. Our trained
GUI-Hopper gains more from deeplinks and retains
these gains when irrelevant candidates are included.
Supply
Qwen3.7-plus
GUI-Hopper (9B)
SR (%) ↑
Length ↓
SR (%) ↑
Length ↓
NA
61.5
25.6
56.7
23.1
GT
62.4
21.4
63.8
21.7
Ten
59.5
21.4
63.5
21.8
Full
53.0
24.1
62.8
21.7
NA: no deeplinks; GT: task-matched; Ten: retrieval top 10; Full:
full catalog. Length: average steps over all trajectories.
Although deeplinks can bypass lengthy GUI
navigation, agents must select task-relevant
deeplinks to actually realize this efficiency.
Table 4 compares the effectiveness and ro-
bustness of Qwen3.7-plus and GUI-Hopper
under different deeplink supply conditions.
For Qwen3.7-plus, task-matched deeplinks
(GT)
primarily
boost
navigation
effi-
ciency—reducing
trajectory
length
by
16.25%—even without hybrid-action train-
ing. However, expanding the catalog to Ten
and Full steadily degrades its success rate
(falling to 52.99%), indicating that broader
candidate sets introduce decision noise that
the base model cannot filter out.
In contrast, GUI-Hopper exhibits remarkable robustness to catalog expansion, maintaining nearly
identical success rates (∼63%) and step counts (∼21.7) across settings of ‘GT’, ‘Ten’, and ‘Full’.
Notably, Ten trails the oracle GT setting by merely 0.29 percentage points. This confirms that
hybrid-action training enables the policy to reliably discern and invoke task-relevant actions from
noisy pools, supporting a practical division of labor where retrieval prunes the search space while
the policy executes precise selection.
5
CONCLUSION
In this work, we challenge the assumption that mobile agents must navigate screen-by-screen. We
introduce GUI-Hopper, a framework that integrates app-native deeplinks as a high-level navigation
channel alongside fine-grained GUI control. To enable this, we develop an automated pipeline that
mines deeplinks, validates them on real devices, and grounds them in descriptions of their landing
screens. Through hybrid trajectory synthesis and online reinforcement learning, the model learns a
robust policy to invoke deeplinks when optimal and seamlessly fall back to GUI actions when neces-
sary, on both synthetic environments and real mobile phones. Our evaluations on MobileWorld and
MobileWorld-Real demonstrate that GUI-Hopper significantly improves task success and reduces
trajectory lengths across all tested model scales. Notably, these gains persist even when deeplinks
9


are withheld at inference, underscoring enhanced underlying task-planning capabilities. By bridg-
ing the gap between app-native programmatic interfaces and fine-grained visual control, this work
establishes a new foundation for the next generation of mobile GUI agents.
Weaknesses & Limitations.
Without system privileges, deeplink coverage is limited to screens
that applications expose for external access. Furthermore, our current evaluation is restricted to the
Android ecosystem. Future work will explore system-level integrations and dynamically enrich the
deeplink catalog using user-specific parameters captured during live interaction.
AI USE STATEMENT
In this work, we used generative AI tools for drafting and polishing the text of the paper and for
assisting with the implementation of experiment and analysis code. We have not used generative
AI tools for generating the research ideas or the experimental design, and the remaining required-
disclosure categories are not applicable to this work. Additionally, generative AI models serve as
components of the method itself: as described in Section 3.2, they generate and filter the natural-
language descriptions in the deeplink catalog. We have reviewed all AI-assisted work: AI-drafted
text was revised by the authors, and AI-assisted code was verified and tested for correctness. We
take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims or artifacts produced with
the aid of generative AI.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The agent interacts with applications only through their open interfaces: GUI operations available to
any user, and deeplink entry points that applications expose for external invocation by design. Our
experiments did not use real users’ personal information. The user-specific examples in Appendix D
illustrate potential applications of the implemented parameter-capture mechanism.
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
The mining pipeline is described in Section 3.2, with implementation details, prompts, and statistics
in Appendix A. Appendix B presents the deeplink schema and the prompt format seen by the model.
Training settings are provided in Section 4.1 and Appendix C, and the harness implementation is
detailed in Appendix D. The evaluation protocol—benchmarks, task counts, supply conditions, and
metrics—is specified in Section 4.1. We will release the trained models and the deeplink catalog for
MobileWorld.
REFERENCES
Anthropic.
Introducing Claude Opus 4.6.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-opus-4-6, 2026.
Apple
Inc.
App
intents.
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/
appintents, 2024.
Tanzirul Azim, Oriana Riva, and Suman Nath. uLink: Enabling user-defined deep linking to app
content. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services (MobiSys), 2016.
ByteDance Seed. UI-TARS-1.5. https://seed-tars.com/1.5/, 2025.
ByteDance Seed.
Seed 2.0 official launch.
https://seed.bytedance.com/en/blog/
seed-2-0-official-launch, 2026a.
ByteDance
Seed.
Seed2.1
officially
released:
Advancing
AI
productivity.
https://seed.bytedance.com/en/blog/
seed2-1-officially-released-advancing-ai-productivity, 2026b.
Wanxia Cao, Chengzhen Duan, Pei Fu, Pengzhi Gao, Niu Lian, Fazhan Liu, Hui Liu, Heng Qu,
Qinzhuo Wu, Zhehao Yu, et al. Xiaomi-gui-0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.31410,
2026.
10


Changlong Gao, Zhangxuan Gu, Yulin Liu, Xinyu Qiu, Shuheng Shen, Yue Wen, Tianyu Xia,
Zhenyu Xu, Zhengwen Zeng, Beitong Zhou, Xingran Zhou, Weizhi Chen, Sunhao Dai, Jingya
Dou, Yichen Gong, Yuan Guo, Zhenlin Guo, Feng Li, Qian Li, Jinzhen Lin, Yuqi Zhou, Linchao
Zhu, Liang Chen, Zhenyu Guo, Changhua Meng, and Weiqiang Wang. UI-Venus-1.5 Technical
Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09082, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.
09082.
Google.
App actions overview.
https://developer.android.com/develop/
devices/assistant/overview, 2024.
Google. About deep links. https://developer.android.com/training/app-links,
2026a.
Google.
Intents and intent filters.
https://developer.android.com/guide/
components/intents-filters, 2026b.
Google. Create shortcuts. https://developer.android.com/develop/ui/compose/
system/shortcuts/creating-shortcuts, 2026c.
Google DeepMind.
Gemini 3.1 Pro model card.
https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-1-pro/, 2026.
Han Hu, Han Wang, Ruiqi Dong, Xiao Chen, and Chunyang Chen. Enhancing GUI exploration
coverage of Android apps with deep link-integrated monkey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19307,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.19307.
Xuhao Hu, Xi Zhang, Haiyang Xu, Kyle Qiao, Jingyi Yang, Xuanjing Huang, Jing Shao, Ming Yan,
and Jieping Ye. ToolCUA: Towards optimal GUI-tool path orchestration for computer use agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12481, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12481.
Lawrence Keunho Jang, Jing Yu Koh, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Odysseys: Bench-
marking web agents on realistic long horizon tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24964, 2026.
Wenjia Jiang, Yangyang Zhuang, Chenxi Song, Xu Yang, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and Chi Zhang. AppA-
gentX: Evolving GUI agents as proficient smartphone users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02268,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02268.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
partially observable stochastic domains.
Artificial Intelligence, 101(1–2):99–134, 1998.
doi:
10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00023-X.
Quyu Kong, Xu Zhang, Zhenyu Yang, Nolan Gao, Chen Liu, Panrong Tong, Chenglin Cai,
Hanzhang Zhou, Jianan Zhang, Liangyu Chen, et al. Mobileworld: Benchmarking autonomous
mobile agents in agent-user interactive and mcp-augmented environments. In Proceedings of the
64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pp. 6142–6167, 2026.
Fang Liu, Chun Wang, Andres Pico, Danfeng Yao, and Gang Wang. Measuring the insecurity of
mobile deep links of Android. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2017.
Guangyi Liu, Pengxiang Zhao, Gao Wu, Yiwen Yin, Mading Li, Liang Liu, Congxiao Liu, Zhang
Qi, Mengyan Wang, Liang Guo, Jiangning Zhang, and Yong Liu. MobileForge: Annotation-free
adaptation for mobile GUI agents with hierarchical feedback-guided policy optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2606.19930, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.19930.
Xiao Liu, Bo Qin, Dongzhu Liang, Guang Dong, Hanyu Lai, Hanchen Zhang, Hanlin Zhao, Iat Long
Iong, Jiadai Sun, Jiaqi Wang, et al. AutoGLM: Autonomous foundation agents for GUIs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.00820, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00820.
Lychee Team. KnowAct-GUIClaw: Know deeply, act perfectly, personal GUI assistant with self-
evolving memory and skill. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.12625, 2026.
Yun Ma, Ziniu Hu, Yunxin Liu, Tao Xie, and Xuanzhe Liu. Aladdin: Automating release of deep-
link APIs on Android. In Proceedings of the Web Conference (WWW), 2018.
11


Moonshot AI. Kimi K2.6: Advancing open-source coding. https://www.kimi.ai/blog/
kimi-k2-6, 2026.
OpenAI. GPT-5.6: Frontier intelligence that scales with your ambition. https://openai.com/
index/gpt-5-6/, 2026.
Yujia Qin, Yining Ye, Junjie Fang, Haoming Wang, Shihao Liang, Shizuo Tian, Junda Zhang, Jiahao
Li, Yunxin Li, Shijue Huang, et al. Ui-tars: Pioneering automated gui interaction with native
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12326, 2025.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=
qwen3.5, 2026a.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.7-Plus: Multimodal agent intelligence. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=
qwen3.7-plus, 2026b.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of math-
ematical reasoning in open language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300.
Yifan Sui, Xin Huang, Hongbing Li, Fang Xu, Jiahe Lv, Haolong Yan, Yeqing Shen, Litao Liu,
Zhimin Fan, Ziyang Meng, et al. Androiddaily: A verifiable benchmark for mobile gui agents on
real-world closed-source applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.27761, 2026.
Yutian Tang, Yulei Sui, Haoyu Wang, Xiapu Luo, Hao Zhou, and Zhou Xu. All your app links are
belong to us: Understanding the threats of instant apps based attacks. In Proceedings of the ACM
Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations
of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), 2020.
Zhengyang Tang, Xin Lai, Pengyuan Lyu, Xinyuan Wang, Tianyi Bai, Chenxin Li, Yiduo Guo,
Huawen Shen, Yuxuan Liu, Junyi Li, Zhengyao Fang, Yang Ding, Yi Zhang, Weinong Wang,
Xingran Zhou, Liang Wu, Fei Tang, Sunqi Fan, Shangpin Peng, Zheng Ruan, Anran Zhang,
Benyou Wang, Ji-Rong Wen, Rui Yan, Chengquan Zhang, and Han Hu. PhoneBuddy: Training
open models for agentic phone use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.23049, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2606.23049.
Venus Team, Zhuohan Cai, Haoxing Chen, Jiaxuan Chen, Weizhi Chen, Changlong Gao, Zhangxuan
Gu, Yuan Guo, Yusong Hu, Jianrong Jiang, Jianguo Li, Runze Li, Jinzhen Lin, Zhenyu Ma,
Changhua Meng, Han Peng, Xinyu Qiu, Shuheng Shen, Zhongyi Shui, Weiqiang Wang, Ming
Wen, Zhuoer Xu, Hang Yan, Kaiwen Yang, Ruilin Yao, Nanjun Yu, Zhengwen Zeng, Lianrui
Zhang, Yunzhu Zhang, Zhe Zhao, and Beitong Zhou. UI-Venus-2 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2609.00028, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.00028.
Haoming Wang, Haoyang Zou, Huatong Song, Jiazhan Feng, Junjie Fang, Junting Lu, Longxiang
Liu, Qinyu Luo, Shihao Liang, Shijue Huang, et al. Ui-tars-2 technical report: Advancing gui
agent with multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02544, 2025a.
Junyang Wang, Haiyang Xu, Jiabo Ye, Ming Yan, Weizhou Shen, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, and Jitao
Sang. Mobile-agent: Autonomous multi-modal mobile device agent with visual perception. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.16158, 2024.
Zhenhailong Wang et al. Mobile-Agent-E: Self-evolving mobile assistant for complex tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.11733, 2025b.
Liangxuan Wu et al. From assistants to adversaries: Exploring the security risks of mobile LLM
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12981, 2025.
Weikai Xie, Li Zhang, Shihe Wang, Rongjie Yi, and Mengwei Xu. DroidCall: A dataset for LLM-
powered Android intent invocation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP, 2025.
12


Haiyang Xu, Xi Zhang, Haowei Liu, Junyang Wang, Zhaozai Zhu, Shengjie Zhou, Xuhao Hu, Feiyu
Gao, Junjie Cao, Zihua Wang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jitong Liao, Qi Zheng, Jiahui Zeng, Ze Xu, Shuai
Bai, Junyang Lin, Jingren Zhou, and Ming Yan. Mobile-agent-v3.5: Multi-platform fundamental
gui agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16855, 2026.
Yifan Xu, Xiao Liu, Xueqiao Sun, Siyi Cheng, Hao Yu, Hanyu Lai, Shudan Zhang, Dan Zhang,
Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Androidlab: Training and systematic benchmarking of android au-
tonomous agents. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 2144–2166, 2025.
Haolong Yan, Jia Wang, Xin Huang, Yeqing Shen, Ziyang Meng, Zhimin Fan, Kaijun Tan, Jin Gao,
Lieyu Shi, Mi Yang, et al. Step-gui technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15431, 2025.
Yuhao Yang, Zhen Yang, Zi-Yi Dou, Anh Nguyen, Keen You, Omar Attia, Andrew Szot, Michael
Feng, Ram Ramrakhya, Alexander Toshev, et al. Ultracua: A foundation model for computer use
agents with hybrid action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17790, 2025.
Chi Zhang et al.
AppAgent:
Multimodal agents as smartphone users.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.13771, 2023.
Pengxiang Zhao et al. MAS-Bench: A unified benchmark for shortcut-augmented hybrid mobile
GUI agents. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL), 2026. arXiv:2509.06477.
Hanzhang Zhou, Xu Zhang, Panrong Tong, Jianan Zhang, Liangyu Chen, Quyu Kong, Chenglin
Cai, Chen Liu, Yue Wang, Jingren Zhou, and Steven Hoi. MAI-UI Technical Report: Real-
World Centric Foundation GUI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22047, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2512.22047.
Hanzhang Zhou, Panrong Tong, Xu Zhang, Quyu Kong, Chenglin Cai, Tianyu Xia, Gongjie
Zhang, Jianan Zhang, Long Li, Long Chen, Lei Wang, Gaole Dai, Pengxiang Li, Liangyu
Chen, Yue Wang, and Steven Hoi. Qwen-UI-Agent technical report: Toward next-generation
real-world centric foundation GUI agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.28227, 2026.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.28227.
13


A
MINING PIPELINE: IMPLEMENTATION, PROMPTS, AND CATALOG
STATISTICS
This appendix supplements Section 3.2 with implementation details, final catalog statistics, and the
prompts used in the mining pipeline.
Static analysis.
Candidate entries are extracted with the Shortcut-Anything tool released alongside
MAS-Bench (Zhao et al., 2026), which parses manifest declarations and shortcut definitions from
the application package. Entries that differ only in how parameters are represented in the URI are
consolidated by URI structure. Static extraction alone does not establish whether an entry works,
whether it opens a meaningful screen, or which parameter values it accepts. The remainder of the
pipeline answers these questions on real devices.
Exportability filtering.
Android only allows external invocation of components that the applica-
tion explicitly exports. We therefore filter out candidates whose target components are not exported.
Resolvability screening.
For each remaining candidate, we use a read-only package-manager
query to check whether an installed component can handle it, without launching the application
or invoking a model.
On-device verification.
We test the resolvable candidates on real devices and retain only those
that open a meaningful screen. For parameterized entries, we test candidate values and retain a
parameter only if changing its value visibly changes the landing screen.
Deduplication.
Different verified entries can lead to the same screen—the search screen of one
map application was reachable through 11 entries spanning 5 domain variants and 3 URI schemes.
We consolidate duplicates using criteria ordered by evidential strength: repeated calls on the device,
screenshot and text comparisons, and a final command-level check in which byte-identical invoca-
tion commands take precedence over the other evidence. Uncertain cases are left unmerged to avoid
merging distinct entries. We also exclude entries that open transient content instances rather than
stable functional screens.
Catalog statistics.
The final catalog contains 1,251 agent-callable entries across 26 applications,
including 246 entries with input parameters. Table 5 reports the per-application distribution.
Table 5: Per-application counts in the verified deeplink catalog for MobileWorld-Real. The catalog
contains 1,251 callable entries across 26 applications.
Application
Entries
Application
Entries
Bilibili
330
Huaxiaozhu
15
Xiaohongshu
177
Baidu Maps
11
Weibo
148
Meituan Dache
11
NetEase Cloud Music
128
NetEase News
9
Douyin
91
Tencent News
5
iQIYI
75
Baidu
4
Piaoniu
60
Kuaishou
3
AMap
44
Tomato Novel
3
Zhihu
43
Tencent Video
2
Taopiaopiao
35
Baidu Tieba
1
Didi
20
Toutiao Lite
1
Youdao
17
Dongchedi
1
Autohome
16
Doubao
1
Total
1,251
Prompts.
A vision-language model assists with on-device verification and deduplication. During
verification, the prompt guides the model to propose parameter values, invoke candidates, assess
their landing screens, and write catalog descriptions in the format specified in Appendix B. It also
14


instructs the model to identify tracking- or session-bound parameters that should be excluded from
the released catalog. This prompt is released together with the catalog. For deduplication, the two
prompts below ask the model to group equivalent entries from the same application and URI base.
The second also uses landing-screen screenshots as evidence. The calling program then selects
which entry to retain under fixed rules.
Deeplink deduplication prompt
You are deduplicating a batch of Android deeplink tools. They come from the
same app and the same URI base, but they may be entirely different features
(sharing one routing shell), or one feature inflated into several entries
by different parameter values.
Criteria (follow strictly; do not improvise):
- SAME feature = lands on the same page, and the parameters are semantically
interchangeable (only their values differ).
- DIFFERENT features = different landing pages, or parameters that denote
different business objects.
- Same page but resting on a different tab / sub-page -> count as different
features, and note "same page, different tab" in the reason.
- When unsure, put the entry in its own group and mark uncertain=true.
Do not guess: a wrong merge costs far more than a missed one.
Output strict JSON, with no explanatory text:
{"groups":[{"members":["<id>"],"reason":"...","uncertain":false}]}
Use the short ids from the input verbatim (like c01); do not rewrite or
expand them. Every input id must appear in exactly one group -- none
missing, none repeated.
Do not output a "keep" field -- which entry to keep is decided by the
caller under fixed rules, not by you.
Deeplink deduplication prompt with screenshot evidence
Below are several deeplink candidates from the same app and the same URI
base. For each candidate you are given: id, tool name, parameter names,
textual description, and the screenshot of the landing page it actually
opened on a real device.
Judge whether they are the same feature, and split them into groups.
Criteria (follow strictly):
- SAME feature = lands on the same page, parameters only differ in value
(e.g., different products on the same product-detail page).
- DIFFERENT features = different landing pages, or parameters that denote
different business objects.
- Same page but resting on a different tab / sub-page -> different
features; note it in the reason.
- A screenshot showing an error page / blank page / login page / loading
state cannot serve as evidence of sameness -- two entries both failing
to open does not make them the same feature. Put such an entry in its
own group and mark uncertain=true.
- Trust the screenshot. When the screenshot conflicts with the textual
description, follow the screenshot and state the conflict in the reason.
- When unsure, put the entry in its own group and mark uncertain=true.
Do not guess: a wrong merge costs far more than a missed one.
Output strict JSON, with no explanatory text:
{"groups":[{"members":["<id>"],"reason":"...","uncertain":false}]}
Use the short ids from the input verbatim (like c01). Every input id must
appear in exactly one group -- none missing, none repeated.
B
DEEPLINK CATALOG FORMAT AND AGENT PROMPT
This appendix details the catalog entry format introduced in Section 3.2 and shows how deeplink
candidates are presented to the model.
Schema.
Each catalog entry contains model-facing and harness-facing fields. The model-facing
fields hold the name, the description, and the parameter definitions. The tool description names the
landing screen and ends with an After firing: clause describing the expected outcome and
any GUI actions still required. Each parameter definition specifies its meaning, format constraints,
an example value, and mistakes to avoid. The harness-facing fields, hidden from the model, store a
15


parameterized Android activity-manager command template and the expected landing Activity. The
harness uses these fields to execute the call and compare the observed Activity with the expected
one (Section 3.4). Figure 3 illustrates an AMap driving-route entry and its observed landing screen.
One catalog entry: from arguments to a real landing
Model-facing
Harness-only · hidden from the model
Real landing · GUI continues
name
amap_driving_route
description
Open Amap driving route results between an origin place
and a destination place. It shows route options with
ETA/distance but does not start navigation automatically.
Parameters · required strings
origin_name = "上海虹桥站"
Origin place name or address to put in the route start field.
destination_name = "人民广场"
Destination place name or address to put in the route end
field.
Format
Plain text place name or address; the executor URL-
encodes query values.
Avoid empty or ambiguous place names.
After firing
Lands on the route result page; tap Start Navigation in the
UI only if the task explicitly requires active navigation.
Invocation template
am start -W -a android.intent.action.VIEW
-c android.intent.category.DEFAULT -d
"androidamap://route?sourceApplication=
hopper_stage2&sname={origin_name}&dname=
{destination_name}&dev=0&m=0&t=0" -p
com.autonavi.minimap
Expected landing Activity
com.autonavi.minimap/
com.autonavi.map.activity.SplashActivity
Start Navigation
Tap only if the task requires active navigation.
Figure 3: An AMap driving-route entry connecting model-facing descriptions with harness-side
execution and landing verification. The deeplink opens route results for the specified origin and
destination. Starting navigation remains a GUI action when required by the task.
Prompt format.
The model-facing fields of the selected deeplink entries are included in the sys-
tem prompt. The listing below presents the system prompt for one evaluation request, with the
application list omitted and the 10 candidate deeplinks retained. The prompt defines the agent role,
output format, and GUI action space before presenting the deeplink candidates as function-calling
schemas. A final usage guideline instructs the agent to verify task completion through the GUI rather
than rely on a successful deeplink call alone.
You are a GUI agent. You are given a task and your action history, with screenshots. You
need to perform the next action to complete the task.
## Output Format
For each function call, return the thinking process in <think> </think> tags, and a json
object with function name and arguments within <tool_call></tool_call> XML tags:
‘‘‘
<think>
...
</think>
<tool_call>
{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments": <args-json-object>}
</tool_call>
‘‘‘
## Action Space
{"action_type": "click", "coordinate": [x, y]}
{"action_type": "double_click", "coordinate": [x, y]}
{"action_type": "long_press", "coordinate": [x, y]}
{"action_type": "type", "text": ""}
{"action_type": "open", "text": "app_name"} # app_name must be chosen from the available
apps listed in the Note section.
{"action_type": "drag", "start_coordinate": [x1, y1], "end_coordinate": [x2, y2]}
{"action_type": "system_button", "button": "button_name"} # Options: back, home, menu,
enter
{"action_type": "wait", "waiting_time": "xxx"} # waiting_time denotes the wait time in
seconds.
{"action_type": "ask_user", "text": "xxx"} # you can ask user for more information to
complete the task.
{"action_type": "terminate", "answer": "xxx", "status": "success or failed"}
## Deeplink Tools
You are also provided with Deeplink tools, you can use them to complete the task.
16


{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "clock_open_timer", "description": "[Clock]
Open Clock to the Timer screen. After firing: set duration and start timer.",
"parameters": {"type": "object", "properties": {}, "required": []}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "calendar_open_view_or_event", "description":
"[Calendar] Open Fossify Calendar to a date in day, month, year, agenda, or week
view. After firing: calendar opened to requested date/view.", "parameters": {"type":
"object", "properties": {"day_code": {"type": "string", "description": "Target date
to open in the calendar. Format: YYYYMMDD. Example: 20261224. If omitted/empty:
Omitted or empty uses device GMT current date. Avoid: Do not use dashed dates;
invalid formats may crash."}, "view_to_open": {"type": "string", "description":
"View selector: 1 month, 2 year, 3 agenda, 4 week. Format: Integer 1, 2, 3, or 4.
Example: 1. If omitted/empty: Omit for day view; empty string is invalid. Avoid: Do
not use empty or outside 1-4."}}, "required": []}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "clock_set_timer", "description": "[Clock]
Create and start a countdown timer in Clock. After firing: timer starts; UI opens
unless skip_ui=true.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties":
{"length_seconds": {"type": "integer", "description": "Countdown duration in
seconds. Format: Positive integer seconds. Example: 90. If omitted/empty: Required;
no default."}, "message": {"type": "string", "description": "Timer label. Format:
Plain text label. Example: Tea break. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty uses
default duration label."}, "skip_ui": {"type": "boolean", "description": "Whether to
avoid foregrounding Clock. Format: Boolean true or false. Example: False. If
omitted/empty: Omitted opens Clock; empty string is invalid. Avoid: Do not pass an
empty boolean value."}}, "required": ["length_seconds"]}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "camera_open_photo_capture", "description":
"[Camera] Open Android camera photo-capture UI for taking a still image. After
firing: press shutter to capture.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties":
{"output_uri": {"type": "string", "description": "Destination file URI for captured
image. Format: file:///sdcard/.../*.jpg. Example:
file:///sdcard/DCIM/Camera/reenrich_photo_capture.jpg. If omitted/empty: Optional;
omit for app-managed destination. Empty is not useful. Avoid: Do not use empty or
non-file destinations."}}, "required": []}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "mail_compose", "description": "[Mail] Open
email compose with recipient and optional subject or body. After firing: tap Send to
send email.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties": {"to": {"type":
"string", "description": "Recipient email address. Format: RFC-style email address.
Example: greg@example.com. If omitted/empty: Required; empty opens compose without
recipient. Avoid: Do not use display names only."}, "subject": {"type": "string",
"description": "Email subject line. Format: Plain text; URL-encode reserved
characters. Example: ColdSubjectOnly. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves
subject blank. Avoid: Do not combine with body when body must prefill."}, "body":
{"type": "string", "description": "Email body text. Format: Plain text; URL-encode
reserved characters. Example: ColdBodyOnly. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty
leaves body blank. Avoid: Subject parameter present causes body to be ignored."}},
"required": ["to"]}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "contacts_insert", "description": "[Contacts]
Open new-contact editor with contact fields prefilled; saving remains manual. After
firing: tap Save to create the contact.", "parameters": {"type": "object",
"properties": {"name": {"type": "string", "description": "Contact display name;
editor splits full names. Format: Human name, preferably given and family name.
Example: Alex Chen. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves name fields blank.
Avoid: Do not expect full name to remain one field."}, "phone": {"type": "string",
"description": "Contact phone number. Format: E.164 or local dialable number.
Example: +14155550123. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves phone blank. Avoid:
Phone alone does not infer a name."}, "company": {"type": "string", "description":
"Contact organization name. Format: Plain organization name. Example: Northwind
Labs. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves company blank."}, "email": {"type":
"string", "description": "Contact email address. Format: Valid email address.
Example: alex.chen@example.com. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves email
blank."}, "job_title": {"type": "string", "description": "Role title under
organization. Format: Plain job title. Example: Product Manager. If omitted/empty:
Omitted or empty leaves title blank."}, "postal": {"type": "string", "description":
"Contact postal address. Format: Single-line postal address. Example: 1 Market St,
San Francisco, CA 94105. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves address blank."},
"notes": {"type": "string", "description": "Contact note text. Format: Short
free-text note. Example: Met at launch planning. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty
leaves notes blank."}}, "required": []}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "contacts_open", "description": "[Contacts]
Open an existing contact’s detail page by exact display name. After firing: contact
detail page opens.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties": {"name":
{"type": "string", "description": "Exact display name of an existing contact.
Format: Exact Contacts display_name text. Example: Emily Johnson. If omitted/empty:
Required; empty or unresolved names do not open a contact. Avoid: Do not use
nicknames, partial names, or unknown contacts."}}, "required": ["name"]}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "calendar_insert_event", "description":
"[Calendar] Open Calendar’s new-event form with title, location, description, time,
and all-day fields prefilled. After firing: review and tap Save to create the
event.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties": {"title": {"type": "string",
"description": "Event title. Format: Plain text. Example: DeepLink GMT Planning. If
omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves title blank."}, "beginTime": {"type":
"string", "description": "Event start time. Format: Epoch milliseconds; interpret
17


date strings as GMT before firing. Example: 1760799600000. If omitted/empty: Omitted
defaults to current time; empty long fails. Avoid: Do not local-time shift or pass
empty strings."}, "endTime": {"type": "string", "description": "Event end time.
Format: Epoch milliseconds; interpret date strings as GMT before firing. Example:
1760803200000. If omitted/empty: Omitted defaults to current time; empty long fails.
Avoid: Provide with beginTime for future events."}, "eventLocation": {"type":
"string", "description": "Event location text. Format: Place name or address.
Example: Conference Room 3. If omitted/empty: Omitted or empty leaves location
blank."}, "description": {"type": "string", "description": "Event notes. Format:
Plain text. Example: Discuss integration checkpoints. If omitted/empty: Omitted or
empty leaves description blank."}, "allDay": {"type": "string", "description":
"Whether the event is all-day. Format: true or false. Example: false. If
omitted/empty: Omitted behaves as false; empty boolean fails. Avoid: Do not pass
empty or non-boolean values."}}, "required": []}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "clock_set_alarm", "description": "[Clock]
Create an alarm with hour, optional minute, and optional label. After firing: alarm
created and Clock alarm list opens.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties":
{"hour": {"type": "string", "description": "Alarm hour in 24-hour time. Format:
Integer 0-23. Example: 20. If omitted/empty: Required; no default. Avoid: Do not use
12-hour AM/PM text."}, "minutes": {"type": "string", "description": "Alarm minute.
Format: Integer 0-59. Example: 20. If omitted/empty: Omitted defaults to 0. Avoid:
Do not include colon-formatted time."}, "message": {"type": "string", "description":
"Alarm label. Format: Short plain text label. Example: ReenrichAlarm. If
omitted/empty: Omitted or empty creates an unlabeled alarm. Avoid: Avoid unquoted
spaces in shell commands."}}, "required": ["hour"]}}}
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "chrome_open_url", "description": "[Chrome]
Open a complete URL in Chrome for manual reading or follow-up. After firing: page
opened for reading.", "parameters": {"type": "object", "properties": {"url":
{"type": "string", "description": "Complete web URL to open. Format: Absolute URL
with scheme, usually https://. Example:
https://example.com/?deeplink_stage2=chrome_open_url. If omitted/empty: Required;
empty fails, omitted opens app chooser. Avoid: Do not omit scheme or pass an empty
URL."}}, "required": ["url"]}}}
If you want to use Deeplink tools, you must output as the following format:
‘‘‘
<think>
...
</think>
<tool_call>
{"name": <function-name>, "arguments": <args-json-object>}
</tool_call>
‘‘‘
## Note
- Available Apps: ‘[... 47 application names, elided ...]‘.
- You should use the ‘open‘ action to open the app as possible as you can, because it is
the fast way to open the app.
- You must follow the Action Space strictly, and return the correct json object within
<think> </think> and <tool_call></tool_call> XML tags.
# Deeplink shortcuts
Besides the GUI/MCP tools, the following functions are deeplink shortcuts that jump
straight to a screen or pre-fill a form, saving navigation/typing.
- A deeplink only OPENS / PRE-FILLS. It NEVER sends, saves, or posts; finish with GUI
actions (e.g. tap Send / Save).
- CRITICAL: a deeplink’s success ONLY means the screen/form is ready, NOT that the task
is done. Do NOT terminate or answer right after a deeplink; first finish the submit
(tap Send / Save / Post / Confirm) and verify it on screen. Each tool description
says whether a final submit is still needed.
- Its result is a JSON string {"success": bool, "error": ...}. Pre-filled content may be
longer than the visible area; trust it (or scroll to verify) instead of re-typing.
- Use a shortcut only when it matches the current sub-goal; otherwise keep using the GUI
tool.
C
TRAINING CONFIGURATION
This appendix completes the training configuration of Section 4.1. Supervised fine-tuning addition-
ally uses a warmup ratio of 0.05, bf16 precision, and no sequence packing. At each model scale, the
GUI-only and hybrid models use the same SFT configuration, differing only in training trajectories.
Online reinforcement learning initializes the policy from the SFT checkpoint. Each iteration samples
117 tasks with eight trajectories per task. We limit each trajectory to 50 interaction steps and the
context to 20,480 tokens. The resulting interaction steps are used for policy updates with a global
batch size of 512. The policy objective uses asymmetric clipping with ϵlow = 0.2 and ϵhigh = 0.28,
18


without KL regularization. When computing c(τ), a task-relevant deeplink receives partial credit of
0.3 if it is invoked during the trajectory but none of its invocations reaches the expected Activity.
D
AGENT HARNESS IMPLEMENTATION
Execution and feedback.
The model generates a deeplink call in the format shown in Appendix B.
The harness fills the catalog entry’s activity-manager command template with the supplied parameter
values and executes the resulting command on the device to dispatch an Android Intent. Successful
dispatch does not guarantee arrival at the expected screen: Android routes the Intent through the
application’s entry logic, which may briefly bring a splash or routing Activity to the foreground
before the destination appears. The harness therefore verifies the landing by checking whether the
Activity specified in the catalog entry reaches the foreground. If the target application is in the
foreground but the expected Activity has not appeared, the harness waits up to 10 seconds; if the
foreground package is not the target application, it stops waiting within 4 seconds. The harness
then returns the outcome—whether the dispatch succeeded, which Activity was actually reached,
and whether it matches the expected one. This feedback, denoted by ft in Section 3.1, appears
beside the screenshot in the next observation as a text block prefixed with Tool call result:.
If dispatch fails or the observed Activity does not match the expected one, the agent can use this
feedback to continue through GUI actions.
Task-level retrieval.
Retrieval runs once per task, before execution starts. A language model
splits the task into navigation goals in execution order and names the application each goal belongs
to. For each goal, the candidate pool is restricted to tools from the corresponding application. We
use reciprocal rank fusion to combine embedding-based and BM25 rankings. The lexical scores
affect the ranking but do not filter out candidates. We first select the highest-ranked candidate
not already chosen from each goal’s list. We then fill the remaining slots according to the fused
ranking, returning up to 10 entries. To assess retrieval coverage, we manually annotated deeplink
requirements for 100 tasks. Our retrieval method achieves a COMP@10 of 98.3%, indicating high
coverage of task-relevant deeplinks with a candidate set of at most 10 entries.
Capture in use.
The harness captures parameter values from Intents observed during applica-
tion use. These Intents can specify an action, a target component, a data URI with query parame-
ters, and key–value extras. For a mined entry, observation provides values used in the user’s own
interactions—for example, an order identifier, a saved address, or a travel date—that probing alone
may not recover. The user-specific examples above illustrate potential deployment scenarios. Fol-
lowing the filtering criteria used in mining (Appendix A), the harness excludes parameters used for
tracking or tied to a particular session. It associates retained values with the corresponding catalog
entries so that later calls can reuse them.
E
FURTHER ANALYSIS
E.1
GUI ABILITY WITHOUT DEEPLINKS
GUI-only
GUI-Hopper (w/o deeplink)
0
5
10
15
20
1-5
6-10
11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50
Trajectory length (steps)
Avg. number of tasks
Figure 4:
Successful-trajectory length distri-
butions under GUI-only evaluation on Mobile-
World.
Hybrid interaction should expand an agent’s
capabilities without making it dependent on
deeplink availability. Under GUI-only evalua-
tion, GUI-Hopper achieves higher success rates
than the GUI-only trained model at all three
scales (Table 1). Figure 4 further compares their
successful-trajectory length distributions at 9B,
showing comparable execution efficiency with a
slightly lower mean length for GUI-Hopper. To-
gether, these results suggest that learning to use
deeplinks complements GUI ability: the model’s
advantage is not confined to executions that in-
voke direct navigation shortcuts.
19


One possible explanation is that hybrid-action training encourages the model to break tasks into
intermediate goals and identify the screens needed to achieve them. This planning pattern may also
guide execution when only GUI actions are available. The 35B-A3B case in Figure 6 illustrates
this distinction. GUI-Hopper returns to the resume earlier to obtain the recipient’s email address,
whereas the baseline searches Mail and Contacts before returning to the document. Finding the
address takes two steps for GUI-Hopper versus 21 for the baseline, while both use nine steps to
compose and send the email. The savings therefore come from choosing a more direct path to the
required information, rather than using fewer actions to operate the email form.
E.2
EFFICIENCY ACROSS TASK STRUCTURES
Table 6: Qwen3.5-9B performance by task structure on MobileWorld. Success gains are larger for
single-app tasks, while trajectory reductions are larger for multi-app tasks.
Task group Model / Evaluation
SR (%) ↑
Avg. length (steps) ↓
Success-only
All
Single-app
GUI-only / GUI
53.3
16.8
23.7
GUI-Hopper / Hybrid
68.5
16.5
21.0
Multi-app
GUI-only / GUI
55.4
21.7
27.4
GUI-Hopper / Hybrid
59.1
18.5
22.4
Single-app: 55 tasks; multi-app: 62 tasks; three runs per task. Success-only lengths use
each condition’s own successful trajectories.
Cross-application tasks require the agent to reach relevant screens in several apps, creating repeated
opportunities for deeplinks to bypass GUI navigation. Table 6 compares the Qwen3.5-9B GUI-
only model and GUI-Hopper on single-app and multi-app tasks. GUI-Hopper improves success in
both groups while reducing average trajectory length over all runs by 18.4% on multi-app tasks and
11.2% on single-app tasks.
The 4B example in Figure 5 illustrates this cross-application use. GUI-Hopper invokes deeplinks
to open Downloads and prefill an SMS, interleaving them with GUI actions to read the resume and
send the message. This illustrates how app-native entry points can be combined with GUI actions to
shorten multiple stages of a cross-application workflow.
E.3
TASK EXECUTION TIME
Deeplinks can save time by bypassing repeated model decisions and device interactions during GUI
navigation. To assess this practical benefit, we compare the GUI-only trained model using GUI
actions with GUI-Hopper using both GUI and deeplink actions. Tables 7 and 8 report mean durations
over successful and unsuccessful trajectories. For MobileWorld-Real, each comparison uses the
same tasks at a given model scale and counts at most the first 50 steps of each trajectory, matching
the main evaluation budget.
Table 7: Recorded task durations on MobileWorld. GUI-Hopper has lower recorded times at all
three scales, although the two models use different timing methods.
Model size
GUI-only (s) ↓
GUI-Hopper (s) ↓
4B
346.5
181.7
9B
395.8
283.4
35B-A3B
493.9
212.9
On MobileWorld-Real, GUI-Hopper reduces mean execution time by 2.9–11.0% across the three
model scales. Its efficiency advantage therefore extends from fewer actions to less elapsed time un-
der the evaluated configurations. MobileWorld records also show lower durations for GUI-Hopper,
although their different timing methods preclude a controlled speedup estimate.
20


Table 8: Execution time on MobileWorld-Real. GUI-Hopper reduces mean elapsed time by 2.9–
11.0% relative to the GUI-only trained model.
Model size
GUI-only (s) ↓
GUI-Hopper (s) ↓
4B
424.8
378.0
9B
273.0
265.2
35B-A3B
271.2
245.4
F
CASE STUDIES
Trajectory compression with deeplinks.
Figure 5 compares two successful trajectories from the
4B models on a MobileWorld task: finding a candidate’s resume and sending an interview invitation
by SMS. The GUI-only baseline takes 26 steps, including contact search, repeated scrolling, and
message entry. GUI-Hopper completes the task in five steps. It uses files open downloads to
open the Downloads directory, then opens the resume through the GUI to read the recipient’s phone
number. It passes the number and message to sms compose and sends the prefilled message with
a GUI click. The example illustrates how deeplinks shorten navigation and text entry while GUI
actions complete the remaining operations.
Query: Find Kevin's resume and send a text message to Kevin saying: "Your interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning at 10:30 AM."
GUI baseline · 26 steps
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Contact search
Read résumé
Compose & send
Our method · 5 steps
1
deeplink: files_open_downloads
2
click(313, 754)
3
deeplink: sms_compose
4
click(984, 2246)
5
answer: done
Deeplinks bypass navigation steps for efficient task completion.
Deeplink
GUI
Figure 5: Complete successful trajectories for an interview-invitation task on MobileWorld. GUI-
Hopper takes five steps versus 26 for the GUI-only baseline. Direct navigation and SMS prefilling
shorten the workflow, while GUI actions remain necessary to read the resume and send the message.
Screenshots show pre-action observations, and step counts include the final answer.
Task planning without deeplinks.
Figure 6 examines a different source of trajectory compres-
sion: choosing where to obtain the information needed for the next operation. Both 35B-A3B
models complete the interview-email task without deeplinks, but the GUI-only baseline takes 32
steps compared with 14 for GUI-Hopper. After locating the resume, the baseline searches Mail and
Contacts before returning to read it. GUI-Hopper also briefly opens Mail, but returns to the resume
earlier to obtain the recipient’s email address. In the illustrated stage breakdown, finding the address
takes 21 steps for the baseline and two for GUI-Hopper, while composing and sending the email
21


takes nine steps for each. The main difference is therefore how the models obtain the required infor-
mation, rather than how they operate the email form. This case illustrates how identifying a useful
intermediate goal can reduce unnecessary exploration even when execution relies on GUI actions.
Query: Find Kevin's resume and send an email to Kevin saying: "Your interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning at 10:30 AM."
GUI baseline · 32 steps
Our model · GUI-only · 14 steps
1 Locate résumé
2 steps
2 Find recipient email
21 steps
3 Compose & send
9 steps
1 Locate résumé
3 steps
2 Find recipient email
2 steps
3 Compose & send
9 steps
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15
S16
S17
S18
S19
S20
S21
S22
S23
S24
S25
S26
S27
S28
S29
S30
S31
S32
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
Search Mail / Contacts · S3–19
Read résumé · S20–23
GUI baseline · S2
Our model · eval with GUI-only · S4
Thinking
Thinking
I found Kevin's resume - it's "Kevin_CV.pdf" in the Downloads folder. Now I
need to:
1. Note that Kevin's resume is found (Kevin_CV.pdf)
2. Open the Mail app to send an email to Kevin with the message "Your
interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning at 10:30 AM."
I need to find Kevin's email address. Let me check the Mail app or Contacts
app. Let me open the Mail app first to see if there's a contact for Kevin, or I
could check the Contacts app.
Actually, I should open the Mail app to compose an email. But I need
Kevin's email address. Let me check the Contacts app first to find Kevin's
email, or look in the Mail app for any existing correspondence with Kevin.
Let me open the Mail app to look for Kevin's email address.
I'm back in the Files app. I can see Kevin_CV.pdf. 
I need to open it to find Kevin's email address. 
Let me click on the file to open it.
S2 open_app: Mail
S4 click(305, 737) 
Even without a deeplink catalog, our trained model sets clear, attainable short-term goals and executes them efficiently.
Figure 6: GUI-only trajectories and model reasoning for an interview-email task on MobileWorld.
Both 35B-A3B models succeed without deeplinks. GUI-Hopper obtains the recipient’s address from
the resume earlier, completing the task in 14 steps compared with 32 for the GUI-only baseline.
Screenshots show observations before each action, and step counts include the final answer.
Query: Check my email for the date and time of my meeting with Carl.Then, set a one hour calendar event titled 'Board Meeting'
Our model · 19 steps
GUI baseline: 18 steps | Our model: 19 steps
Both succeed · +1 step
S1–2: Read email
S3–4: Incorrect creation
S5–7: Check target date
S8–18: GUI recreation
S19: Complete
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15
S16
S17
S18
S19
S3 · Deeplink call
S8 · Target verification
S8–S18 · GUI recovery
Executed call
Our analysis
Our analysis
Our analysis
deeplink: calendar_insert_event
title: "Board Meeting"
beginTime: "1765897200000"
endTime: "1765900800000"
allDay: "false"
Wrong parameters create a wrong-date
event
Target event is missing
GUI fallback completes the task
The timestamps specify Dec 16, 15:00–16:00
UTC, not Nov 15. The model then saves the
form at S4.
Nov 15 shows only Morning run. The model
clicks + to recreate Board Meeting via GUI.
After 11 GUI steps, Board Meeting appears on
Nov 15, 15:00–16:00. Result shown at S19.
Observation · S3
Observation · S8
Result · S19
GUI fallback can recover from incorrect deeplink use, but at the cost of additional interaction steps.
Figure 7: GUI recovery after incorrect deeplink use on a MobileWorld calendar task. The call
reaches the expected Activity but prefills the wrong date, showing why the model must also check
task-relevant screen contents. GUI-Hopper later recreates the event through GUI actions, taking 19
steps versus 18 for the GUI-only baseline. Removal of the earlier wrong-date event is not shown.
22


GUI recovery after incorrect deeplink use.
Figure 7 illustrates an error that landing verification
alone cannot detect. Asked to schedule a meeting on November 15, the 9B GUI-Hopper supplies
timestamps for December 16 to calendar insert event. The call passes landing verification
because it reaches the expected Calendar Activity. However, the model overlooks the incorrect date
shown in the form and saves the event. When it checks November 15, it notices that the meeting
is missing and recreates it through GUI actions. The recreation takes 11 steps within a 19-step
trajectory, compared with 18 steps for the successful GUI-only baseline. Reaching the expected
screen therefore does not establish that the supplied parameters satisfy the task: the model must also
check the screen’s task-relevant contents. Here, GUI recovery achieves the requested outcome at an
interaction cost, although the trajectory does not show removal of the earlier wrong-date event.
23
